Please enable JS and disable any ad blockerJump to
Stores are closing and shoppers are cutting back on spending. TJ Maxx says its thriving because of this.In a call with investors last month – announcing its fourth-quarter and fiscal 2023 earnings – CEO Ernie Herrman said that the company is in an extremely strong position when it comes to sourcing inventory, describing the current inventory availability as "phenomenal."Recent store closures, and a slowdown in consumer spending because of inflation, have meant that many retailers are being left with a surplus of stock that they want to offload in a quick and discreet way, and TJ Maxx is often the perfect solution for this. The chain buys up excess inventory at a discounted rate and sells it to the consumer at bargain prices – typically 20% to 60% less than full-price retailers. It is an attractive place for retailers to offload inventory because TJ Maxx is happy to buy incomplete assortments, buys without asking for returns privileges, and mostly sells in-store so there's limited risk of discounted brand names being splashed all over the internet which could harm the brand image. So, how does it keep its prices so low?
                        
                      TJ Maxx has a team of more than 1,200 buyers who source products from its 21,000 vendors globally. These buyers are the "secret sauce" to its success, Neil Saunders, managing director of GlobalData Retail, told Insider. They know where to look for the best deals and cast their web wide.TJ Maxx's buyers know how to negotiate the best prices but they're also in a strong position to do so. Essentially, parent company TJX buys other companies' mistakes when they've ordered too much inventory or demand has tailed off, Simeon Siegel, managing director of BMO Capital told Insider. "Inventory doesn't get better with age," he said, and because retailers are aware of this, TJ Maxx pays much less upfront for this product. 2022 was a good example of how the market can turn in TJ Maxx's favor. While the company was subject to industry-wide rising supply chain costs, the snafus in this pipeline meant that many retailers were receiving the wrong inventory at the wrong time and an easy way to get rid of it was to sell to the off-price channel. TJ Maxx continues to have the "pick of a large pool" when it comes to inventory, Morningstar analyst Zain Akbar wrote in a note to clients in January.
The scale and size of TJ Maxx — it has vendors in over 100 countries and stores in nine — mean that its buying team is often buying product in bulk, which gives it more room to negotiate deals with sellers.According to Morningstar research, it also buys up inventory when it's cheaper to store up for future seasons. And as it's happy to buy a limited assortment rather than the full collection of sizes and styles from a retailer, it is an attractive option for these stores and therefore has more leverage to bargain on price. TJ Maxx also sells products that are manufactured especially for the chain, which means it has direct control over the pricing in this area. This is an area of its business that is growing, Siegel said. Well-known brands like Ralph Lauren have been known to make items for TJ Maxx in the past, but pulled back in a bid to address worries about brand exclusivity. TJ Maxx's low-frills stores also help to keep costs down. These stores are typically stuffed with racks of product. The appeal here is the treasure hunt shopping experience, where customers care more about assortment and price than the store design. 
                          Read next
                        

	
			Today's Digital Daily	
			


	
			Aéropostale Heading for the Metaverse	
			


	
			Today's Digital Daily	
			
CEO Ernie Herrman said the off-pricer is finding “phenomenal” availability of goods in the retail system.Deputy Managing Editor
	While fashion brands have reported mixed results for the fourth quarter so far and are tiptoeing into 2023, off-price giant The TJX Cos. Inc. is striding into the new year and eyeing market share gains. 
	Despite an unexpected shrink charge in the fourth quarter, the company seems to be settling naturally into the realities of the fashion market today, attracting shoppers who are wary of the economy and able to scoop up loads of excess goods in the retail marketplace. 
	Net profits for the quarter rose 10.4 percent to $1 billion, or 89 cents a diluted share, from $940 million, or 78 cents, a year earlier.




	
			Related Galleries	
	













	Fashion Trends
	



	
			They Are Wearing: Paris Fashion Week Fall 2023	
			













	Parties
	



	
			Best Dressed at the 2023 SAG Awards	
			







	However, merchandise margins did disappoint, decreasing slightly due to “an unplanned 0.6 percentage point shrink charge,” referring to the catchall accounting category that reflects the impact of shoplifting and other instances in which inventory goes astray. TJX had expected shrink to provide a 0.5 percentage point benefit to pretax profit margins and is now planning shrink to be flat.

	









	Sales for the three months ended Jan. 28 increased 4.8 percent to $14.5 billion from $13.9 billion. 
	While earnings were on-target with what analysts projected, sales came in about $400 million better than projections.
	The Marmaxx division, which includes the T.J. Maxx, Marshalls and Sierra stores and websites, saw comparable sales rise 7 percent, with strength in both apparel and accessories. The HomeGoods business, on the other hand, comped down 7 percent with tougher comparisons from a year ago.
	Ernie Herrman, chief executive officer and president of TJX, told analysts on a conference call that the “freshness” of the retailer’s merchandise mix was setting it apart. 
	“The first quarter is off to a strong start,” Herrman said. “We are excited about our plans to drive sales and customer traffic, and are laser-focused on initiatives to drive profitability this year and beyond.  Availability of quality-branded merchandise is phenomenal. We are in a great position to take advantage of the opportunities we are seeing in the marketplace.
	“Further, we are convinced our commitment to value and our treasure-hunt shopping experience will continue to serve us well in this environment,” the CEO said. “Importantly, we continue to see many opportunities to capture market share and improve profitability over both the short and long term.”
	Disruptions in the supply chain during the pandemic — and overly hopeful buying on the part of many retailers — has led to something of a bonanza of excess inventory that the off-pricer can choose from. 
	TJX has more than 1,200 buyers who buy from about 21,000 vendors. 
	“Our ability to buy goods across good, better and best categories gives us tremendous flexibility in the vendor marketplace,” Herrman said. 
	For the full year, TJX’s net profits increased 6.5 percent to $3.5 billion, or $2.97 a share, as sales rose 2.9 percent to $49.9 billion.
	This year, the company expects its comparable-store sales to be up 2 to 3 percent with earnings per share of $3.39 to $3.51.
	TJX has 4,835 stores across nine countries and Herrman said the company could open another 1,400 doors in its current markets. 

	









	“I am very confident in our plans to grow TJX into an increasingly profitable $60 billion-plus revenue company over the long term,” he said. 
	Investors also see potential in TJX — and analysts agree the company will continue to take share — but much of that has already been built into Wall Street’s assumptions. Shares of the company slipped 1.7 percent to $77.46 on Wednesday.Sign up for WWD news straight to your inbox every day

	
			Most Popular	
	
Get all the top news stories and alerts straight to your inbox.

	
			NYFW Fall 2023 Street Style Hair Trends: Unexpected Updos…	
			


	
			The 20 Best Slouchy Bags That Exude Laid-Back Style	
			


	
			NYFW Street Style Recap: The Fashion Crowd Goes Green	
			
Get all the top news stories and alerts straight to your inbox.

	
			Chris Rock Shreds Will Smith With Oscar Slap Jokes: 'Everybody Called Him a B---- And Who Does He Hit? Me'	
	


	
			Aldi Is Selling a Cordless Dyson Vacuum Alternative & Fans Can't Believe the Price	
	


	
			Chris Rock Slams Will Smith in Live Comedy Special for Netflix: "I'm Not a Victim, Baby"	
	


	
			$2 Billion Powerball Winner Buys Rakish Hollywood Hills Mansion	
	


	
			Newsletter Sign Up	
	
Send us a tip using our anonymous form.WWD and Women's Wear Daily are part of Penske Media Corporation. © 2023 Fairchild Publishing, LLC. All Rights Reserved.Get access to essential strategic content, in-depth reports, industry intelligence, and exclusive data.Get access to essential strategic content, in-depth reports, industry intelligence, and exclusive data.Get access to essential strategic content, in-depth reports, industry intelligence, and exclusive data.Get access to essential strategic content, in-depth reports, industry intelligence, and exclusive data.Sign Into Digital Commerce 360




 


Forgot your password?
Macy’s Inc. and Nordstrom Inc. both reported declines in online sales in 2022. Both retailers struggled with using promotions and discount pricing to offload excess inventory.Macy’s said digital sales were down 9% for the fourth quarter ended Jan. 28, 2022, though they were 24% higher than the comparable period in 2019. Brick-and-mortar store sales fared better, decreasing just 2% year over year. Macy’s is No. 16 in the 2022 Digital Commerce 360 Top 1000.Nordstrom’s ecommerce business felt similar pressures over the period. Digital sales for the fourth quarter ended Jan. 28 were down 13% year over year, and made up 40% of total sales for the quarter. Nordstrom is No. 20 in the 2022 Digital Commerce 360 Top 1000.Macy’s gross margin in the fourth quarter was 34.1%, down from 36.5% a year earlier. The company attributed the decline to markdowns and promotions that were larger than in 2021, a reflection of “the company’s commitment to end 2022 with inventories at the right level and composition.”“We were competitive but measured in our promotions, took strategic markdowns and intentionally did not chase unprofitable sales,” CEO Jeff Gennette said in the statement. The retailer is focused on areas of growth that include private brands, off-mall expansion and luxury goods, he added.Total same-store sales, a key performance metric for retailers, fell 2.7% in the fourth quarter. That figure was supported primarily by strong growth at Bloomingdale’s and Bluemercury, the New York-based company’s higher-end brands. At Macy’s namesake brand, meanwhile, they fell 3.3%.“We believe discretionary spend will be under pressure across income tiers and spending will move toward services and essential goods,” Gennette said on a call with analysts, noting that he expects demand for gift-giving and occasion-based products to remain strong.Like Macy’s, Nordstrom struggled with selling discounted merchandise.While discount rivals such as TJX Companies Inc.’s T.J. Maxx and Ross Stores Inc. (No. 70 in the 2022 Digital Commerce 360 Top 1000) have attracted more shoppers as inflation bites, Nordstrom’s off-price Rack business has floundered. Sales remain below pre-pandemic levels, a sign that Rack’s market share has been shrinking.Sales at Rack fell 8.1% in the quarter versus a 2.4% drop at the Nordstrom-banner stores. Still, executives told analysts on an earnings call that they plan to open 20 Rack stores starting in the spring because off-price consumers tend to prefer in-store shopping. Rack locations are less expensive to build than a full-fledged department store, executives added. Sales at U.S. department stores have been uneven in recent months, signaling a pullback by some shoppers amid stubbornly high inflation. Companies’ decisions to build up merchandise during the pandemic consumption boom have now left some store operators stuck with too much inventory, leading to profit-busting markdowns.Nordstrom says a reduction of merchandise and the winding down of its Canada operations will improve performance in 2023.Stay on top of the latest developments in the ecommerce industry. Sign up for a complimentary subscription to Digital Commerce 360 Retail News.Follow us on LinkedIn, Twitter and Facebook. Be the first to know when Digital Commerce 360 publishes news content.More on ThisIn This ArticleCompaniesIndustriesTopicsRelated Stories
Ryan Cohen builds Nordstrom stake, eyes board changes 
Macy's reports a 5% drop in Q2 online sales 
Snapshot: Macy's Inc. growth and online penetration 
Top apparel merchants see online sales growth dip 
						Copyright © 2022 Digital Commerce 360 | Vertical Web Media LLC					
				Copyright © 2022 Digital Commerce 360 | Vertical Web Media LLC			
                
                    
                        Let Retail Dive's free newsletter keep you informed, straight from your inbox.
                    
                
            Topics covered: retail tech, e-commerce, in-store operations, marketing, and more.Topics covered: brand launches, expansion opportunities, partnerships, startup trends, funding, and more.Topics covered:  Retail advertising, social media, analytics, personalization, search, video, and more.Topics covered: e-commerce, payment technology, IT, in-store tech, cyber security, and more.Topics covered: supply chain and logistics, sourcing, real estate, merchandising, and more.From Toys R Us to J.C. Penney, many retailers have filed over the past few years. Here’s who has fallen victim since 2017.Since 2017, Retail Dive has tracked major bankruptcies in the U.S. retail industry. Over the years, we’ve chronicled the long decline of once-dominant chains like Sears, and the unexpected and swift demise of others, like Lord & Taylor. Even in that short timeframe, some retailers have fallen victim to bankruptcy not once, but twice. In 2019 alone, both Gymboree and Payless filed for their second bankruptcies in two years. And in 2020, with many retailers facing shuttered stores and slow traffic, a record number of retailers — including many who had been teetering for years — filed. Some retailers that enter bankruptcy leave most of their stores behind, opting for a more digital-focused approach, while others are bought out by landlords and continue to operate large footprints. Some brands disappear entirely, while others seem to resurrect again and again. After Toys R Us’ swift liquidation in 2018, for example, the iconic toy brand is now sold at Macy’s.The state of bankruptcies says a lot about the health of the retail sector and the various categories it serves. Which retailers file in a given year provides clues about broader consumer trends and gives insight into the differences between retail’s winners and losers.Retail Dive will continue to update this tracker with the latest major retail bankruptcies. These entries provide information on when major retailers filed, the reasons behind the filing and what their plans were at the time.Keep up with the story. Subscribe to the Retail Dive free daily newsletterTuesday Morning filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in February. At the time of its filing, the Dallas-based company said it secured a $51.5 million debtor-in-possession commitment from Invictus Global Management to support the company’s operations during the case.As part of the reorganization, the company expects to shrink its store footprint by more than half, to 200 locations. Tuesday Morning had nearly 500 stores in 40 states last November and about 6,300 full- and part-time workers at that time. The company previously filed for bankruptcy in 2020. In its 2023 Chapter 11 filing, Tuesday Morning had liabilities and assets of between $100 million to $500 million. The parent company of Chuck & Don’s, Loyal Companion, Kriser’s and Natural Pawz, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in February.As part of the restructuring, the company plans to exit its Loyal Companion and Natural Pawz brands and shut down its existing stores on the East Coast, Texas and California. The company will continue to run under its Chuck & Don’s and Kriser’s brands. The retailer began liquidating 93 of its stores on Feb. 3.“This change allows us to create a stronger foundation for our team and our pet parent communities in our core go-forward brands and markets,” Independent Pet Partners wrote on LinkedIn.Party City Holdco in January filed for Chapter 11. It’s seeking a $150 million debtor-in-possession loan. A judge on Jan. 18 granted the company immediate access to $75 million of the loan.The pandemic tanked consumer demand for the company’s mainstay items – costumes, decorations and party favors – when people canceled in-person celebrations. In court documents, Party City said it has liabilities and assets of $1 billion to $10 billion and 10,001 to 25,000 creditors. The company says an “expedited restructuring” would reduce debt and improve liquidity.Party City has over 800 company-owned and franchised stores. The franchised stores, the company’s Anagram balloon business and subsidiaries outside the U.S. are not part of the bankruptcy case.Beauty accelerator Forma Brands – the owner of Morphe, Playa Beauty and more – filed for bankruptcy one week after announcing the closure of all U.S. Morphe retail locations. The filing included a proposed acquisition deal with lenders in which creditors would provide $33 million in funds to take over its wholesale operations, online platforms and international Morphe retail stores.In court documents, Forma revealed it has about $868 million of funded principal debt and interest obligations. The company noted that it began experiencing “liquidity and operational issues a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, widespread changes to consumers’ beauty habits and their need to terminate partnerships with certain influencers.”Sears Hometown Stores filed for bankruptcy in December in the middle of tussling with its parent, TransformCo, also known as “new Sears.” The home goods-focused chain, an offshoot of the once-iconic retail giant, has about 121 stores in 26 states and Puerto Rico, including locations run by independent dealers. That’s down from nearly 500 when “new Sears” reacquired it shortly after its own bankruptcy four years ago.Bankruptcy became necessary in part because Sears Hometown relies “substantially on TransformCo to provide key products and services,” including inventory, which TransformCo failed to provide, according to a bankruptcy court filing from Sears Hometown CEO Elissa Robertson. In 2019, former Sears CEO Eddie Lampert and his ESL financial firm stymied an effort to liquidate Sears Hometown, replacing two board members and changing its bylaws.Medly, founded in 2017, sells medical prescriptions online and through stores in seven states, calling itself the “nation's fastest-growing digital pharmacy.” About a year after expanding through its acquisition of Colorado-based pharmacy chain Pharmaca, Medly in December filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, stating in court documents that its “working capital has dissipated to the point where the Company will be unable to continue operations.” The company also said it “has contacted potential acquirers to discuss potential acquisitions.” In its filing, Medly lists assets and liabilities of between $100 million and $500 million each.What you need to know: Olympia Sports filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in September after starting a full store liquidation process over the summer. At the time of the filing, CEO Mark Coffey said the company chose to enter bankruptcy in order to retain employees and keep operations going as it wound down its footprint.The sporting goods chain, which was founded in 1975 in Portland, Maine, once operated over 230 stores, but ran just 35 stores when it filed. All of those stores were set to close by Sept. 30, 2022. Olympia Sports was acquired by private equity firm CriticalPoint Capital through its JackRabbit running specialist business in 2019.Iconic beauty company Revlon filed for Chapter 11, citing its burdensome capital structure, which includes over $3 billion in debt. It also pointed to struggles with its supply chain and inflation. Revlon CEO Debra Perelman, daughter of Ron Perelman, said that the filing would provide a “clearer path for our future growth” as it addresses its capital structure. “If executed effectively, Revlon could emerge from bankruptcy with a cleaner balance sheet and a better operating profile, improving longer term business prospects,” David Silverman, retail senior director with Fitch Ratings, said in emailed comments. With a past history of financial duress exacerbated by the pandemic, Escada America filed for bankruptcy in January with immediate plans to close five locations, or roughly half its footprint.The company, which is the U.S. retail arm of the Escada women's fashion brand, also blamed inflexible landlords for the need to file. Rather than litigate over leases, the company aims to shed stores and repay creditors while avoiding "a senseless and unnecessary liquidation."By 2010, some six years after its founding in 2004, Alex and Ani’s wire charm bracelets were a hit, steadily fueling sales for the following five years. But troubles began to brew in 2014, when top executives came and went at a rapid pace, disrupting the jewelry retailer’s momentum, according to court documents filed with the bankruptcy court of Delaware.Founder and ex-CEO Carolyn Rafaelian, who owned the company until 2012 when she sold a stake to private equity, has agreed to a resolution of her own legal claims against the company and part-owner Lion Capital, pending the bankruptcy court’s approval. Under the agreement, she would also sell her remaining 35% stake, per the court files.The retailer is swimming in about $127.4 million in outstanding funded debt obligations. The full effect of a 2019 out-of-court restructuring was stymied by a ransomware attack in February 2020 and then the pandemic. Alex and Ani already has a restructuring support agreement with its debt holders and equity sponsors for a financial and operational restructuring, which must be approved by the court, and is looking for a buyer. The retailer plans to keep operations going during the bankruptcy process, including stores “currently open;” about 25 remain closed due to COVID-19. Furthermore, the company says it will look to exit any leases deemed “uneconomic.”Founded in 2001, The Collected Group brought together three fashion brands: Joie (launched that same year), Equipment and Current/Elliott. Operational woes led to a change in private equity owners in 2018 after KKR converted its debt holdings to equity in an out-of-court restructuring. In the years following, the women’s fashion specialist invested in e-commerce and its wholesale channels, boosting profits. But the pandemic landed hard on fashion apparel and brick-and-mortar shopping. Even before filing for bankruptcy, The Collected Group decided to wind down its physical footprint, which included 33 stores at its largest. In filing for bankruptcy, The Collected Group aimed to reduce debt, complete its brick-and-mortar wind-down and restructure around its growing e-commerce business and wholesale.In early March 2020, Paper Source announced a major expansion after acquiring 30 prime store locations from a fallen rival, the stationery and paper goods specialist Papyrus, as that retailer wound down. Later that month, the world turned on its head as the COVID-19 pandemic sparked stay-at-home orders and mass temporary store closures, including all of Paper Source’s stores. The company had been healthy and growing before the public health crisis. But the sales decline for the year led to liquidity constraints as rent bills piled up. In March, the retailer filed for bankruptcy with a plan to close at least 11 stores and sell itself. On filing, it had a credit bid from current lenders to serve as a stalking horse in a proposed Chapter 11 auction of the company.Belk was among those retailers especially vulnerable when the COVID-19 crisis hit. Saddled with nearly $2 billion in debt, a legacy of a leveraged buyout, the southern department store chain’s liquidity fell by 70% last April. The retailer, while working toward a digital transformation, also is heavily dependent on store traffic; its sales fell 32% between March and December 2020. To buttress its finances, the company forged an agreement with lenders that allowed it to shed $450 million in debt, push out maturities, get new capital and let private equity sponsor Sycamore Partners retain majority ownership. The deal, according to the company, hinged on a lightning-quick trip through bankruptcy court. Belk aimed for 24 hours between filing and emerging, reaching out to creditor groups to gain their buy-in. A federal bankruptcy judge signed off on the deal, clearing the way for a speedy exit from Chapter 11 despite alarms raised by the U.S. trustee assigned to the case.With 66 retail stores, Solstice Sunglasses bills itself as the second-largest specialty retailer of sunglasses in the U.S., focusing on high-end brands like Dior, Gucci, Jimmy Choo, Kate Spade and Ray Ban. The luxury boutique said in a press release that it had been hit financially by the COVID-19 pandemic, with sales down more than 50% from 2019 and “limited relief to compensate for stores being closed and shoppers afraid or unable to shop.” The company filed for Chapter 11 in February with the aim of reorganizing and emerging from bankruptcy intact as a going concern. Solstice hired RCS Real Estate Advisors to evaluate its lease footprint but did not immediately say if or how many stores it planned to close. At the time of filing, Solstice CEO Mikey Rosenberg said in a statement that his team was “optimistic about reorganization as we continue to see increasing business in our stores as COVID restrictions are lifted and in the new fashions that our vendors are providing.”Like many retailers since the pandemic began, the U.S. arm of L’Occitane found itself with declining brick-and-mortar sales and expensive leases on the one hand, and rapidly growing online sales on the other. The managing director for the beauty brand’s North American region said that its lease obligations amount to $30.3 million annually across its 166-store footprint. With brick-and-mortar sales falling 56.5% year over year in the months between April and December, the burden of those costs ballooned very suddenly. The company, whose parent was founded in 1976 in Manosque, France, filed for Chapter 11 with immediate plans to close 23 stores and restructure around a smaller footprint and its digital business.Founded in 1956, women’s apparel seller Christopher & Banks specializes in value-priced women’s apparel and targets smaller markets with a pre-bankruptcy store footprint just shy of 450. The COVID-19 pandemic took a huge toll, decreasing demand among its core customer and adding stress to its finances. The company was facing eviction from some stores and, in January, defaulted on key loans and the lease on its headquarters. Christopher & Banks filed for Chapter 11 in mid-January with plans to close all of its stores and sell off its e-commerce business. An affiliate of Hilco Merchant Resources, and a lender to Christopher & Banks, emerged as a stalking horse bidder on its digital business.Created last year out of some of the parts of the liquidated Art Van Furniture, Loves Furniture immediately ran into problems. For one, it was without a permanent logistics hub, with another company picking up Art Van’s Michigan Warehouse. Loves contracted with a third-party logistics company, but said later that shipping issues left its stores less than ready when they opened. Issues getting orders to customers deepened the company’s problems, hurting its sales and, with them, its underlying financials. The logistics provider sued Loves after the retailer fell behind on its payments. It filed for bankruptcy in January in hopes of restructuring around a smaller footprint. In 2019, Francesca’s shook up its C-suite, hunted for a suitor, went on a cost-cutting mission and planned to shift to a fast-fashion model. Instead of working on a turnaround, however, the retailer spent much of 2020 issuing going concern warnings and permanently closing stores as the pandemic slammed its sales and roiled its plans.But the pandemic wasn’t it’s only problem. The retailer, which runs smaller-than-average stores, had been struggling for a while as apparel sales growth ebbed and fewer consumers shopped at malls. A day after its bankruptcy filing, the Nasdaq warned its stock would be delisted on Dec. 15 — something Francesca’s wouldn’t appeal since its investors are taking it private.TerraMar has committed to keeping at least 275 Francesca’s stores open, out of the 558 it was running at the time of its Chapter 11 filing after closing dozens in recent years.Founded in 1959 as a single store selling organs, Guitar Center eventually became the largest musical instrument retailer in the U.S., with more than 500 stores across its brands. After a private equity buyout, it struggled under its debt load throughout the 2010s.When the pandemic forced it to close its stores, Guitar Center ran into liquidity problems. After striking a deal with bondholders during the summer, the company forged an agreement with key lenders and equity holders to restructure the company’s debt and capital structure in Chapter 11.Founded in 1984, Furniture Factory Outlet ran nearly 70 stores in the Midwest and south central U.S. before the pandemic. As the year started, it was making progress on a turnaround, according to its CFO. But the pandemic forced it to lay off 95% of its staff and permanently shutter more than half its footprint amid the financial tumult. Its supply chain has also been upended by the pandemic, hurting its revenue and further constraining liquidity.Owned by private equity firm Sun Capital Partners, the retailer filed for bankruptcy in November with a $7 million bid to take it over from home goods retailer American Freight.Century 21 has been a favorite retailer for six decades, especially among New Yorkers. The company’s headquarters and downtown flagship were destroyed in the 9/11 terrorist attacks. When it was rebuilt at the site of the devastation, it stood as a symbol of the city’s endurance.The retailer was an early entrant in the off-price game, opening its doors in 1961 and selling high-end apparel for savvy fashionistas. While the likes of TJX Cos., Ross and Burlington have downplayed or avoided e-commerce in order to preserve their store-based treasure hunts and protect their margins, Century 21 ran a website to reach customers beyond the four states where it operates.Insurance payments helped the company recover from the destruction in New York 19 years ago, but some $175 million in claims related to the pandemic have been denied, forcing the retailer to close down, according to a statement last week from Century 21 co-CEO Raymond Gindi, a son of the founders.With support of its lenders through the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York, going-out-of-business sales have commenced at all stores in New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Florida and through its website, the company said last week in court documents.Stein Mart’s downward swing in fortunes over 2020 has been dramatic. After years of declining sales and negative profit, it opened the year with a takeover deal by a private equity firm and an entity controlled by its chairman. But the spread of COVID-19, and the ensuing turmoil in the retail industry and financial markets, threw a wrench into those plans. The deal was nixed, by mutual agreement.Not long after, Stein Mart added language to its regulatory filings acknowledging it might not be able to survive as a going concern as COVID-19 upended the industry. The retailer did see traffic increases after reopening its stores, and was able to land a $10 million loan from the federal government’s stimulus package.But events took another downward turn. COVID-19 surged in Texas, Florida and California, along with other states and areas in the U.S. Those three major states account for some 40% of Stein Mart’s stores and led to another crash in finances. Internal projections showed the retailer would soon run out of cash to operate its business.The retailer filed for Chapter 11 with dim hopes for a savior to come along to buy part or all of its business. Barring that outcome — which even the CEO acknowledges is unlikely given the retail market and past unsuccessful efforts to sell itself — Stein Mart is set to liquidate its stores and sell off any assets of value, including its intellectual property and e-commerce operations.The oldest department store in the U.S. last year was acquired by one of the newest e-retailers, an online apparel rental site, for $75 million. The tie-up was seen, warily by some, as promising for both — Lord & Taylor stores would provide Le Tote with the singular marketing that only brick and mortar can provide, while Le Tote would bring Lord & Taylor new, younger customers. The pandemic, and the temporary closures it forced onto nonessential retailers, ensured that the experiment wouldn’t be given a chance to work, however. Privately owned Le Tote in court documents said it notched about $253.5 million in revenue last year, but in April the company announced layoffs of most its workers at both its namesake company and at Lord & Taylor. The company employs 651, and arrived at bankruptcy court with funded debt obligations of about $137.9 million. The real estate arm of previous owner Hudson’s Bay Co. is its largest shareholder, with a 27.6% interest.Tailored Brands, which owns Men’s Wearhouse, Jos. A. Bank, Moores Clothing for Men and K&G, entered into a restructuring agreement supported by over 75% of its senior lenders. This was after months of warnings from the company that it might have to terminate operations or seek bankruptcy protection due to dramatic sales declines brought on by COVID-19. The retailer was struggling prior to the pandemic. Revenues had declined by 5.6% over the past two years, and the company pointed to the casualization of the American office and “the continuing decline in the brick-and-mortar retail industry generally” as primary pain points. As part of a go-forward plan, the company expects to reduce corporate staff, the number of retail locations, and its supply chain infrastructure.A few Ascena brands — tween label Justice and plus brands Lane Bryant and Catherines — along with the very idea of selling to any and all women at all stages of life, came from Les Wexner’s former L Brands empire. Wexner eventually abandoned them, and that vision. Ascena may be finding out why.The COVID-19 pandemic no doubt sped up Ascena’s restructuring — just a few months ago it denied a bankruptcy was in the cards. But it’s hard to pin its woes on that recent shock alone. Ascena’s original business, Dressbarn, never recovered after encountering headwinds years ago, its newer brands were already in trouble when they were acquired, and the multi-brand nature of the enterprise has been unwieldy for some time. The retailer will come out of the process much smaller. Its stable will shrink dramatically, with massive store closures expected (though not yet enumerated). That includes all locations of the Catherine’s plus-size banner, which is being sold to online plus retailer City Chic. With discount brands Dressbarn and Maurices already gone as of last year, the retailer therefore places its hope of a comeback on premium brands Ann Taylor and Loft and plus-size stalwart Lane Bryant. But the challenges it faced before the pandemic — notably the sales declines of those labels and of apparel sales growth more broadly — await.Founded in 1964 by Robert Anderson, The Paper Store has stayed in the Anderson family ever since and stayed close to its New England home. Now it is looking to sell itself after joining the ranks of other gift specialists to go bankrupt in recent years, including the parent of Papyrus as well as Things Remembered.The retailer — which sells stationery, jewelry, home decor as well as fashion, sports and other products — blamed its financial distress on everything from the calendar to weather to football to, of course, COVID-19. The Paper Store voluntarily closed its stores in March and kept them closed through key selling periods, including Easter and Mother’s Day. With unpaid rent and vendor payables mounting, the retailer wasn’t able to cut costs deeply enough to stay out of court, even after slashing its workforce down to a skeleton crew. In bankruptcy, the retailer hopes a buyer steps up for the company, and quick, to ensure its shelves are stocked ahead of the all-important holiday season. A restructuring adviser to the company said a group that includes one of The Paper Store’s creditors has expressed interest in making a stalking horse bid.RTW Retailwinds, owner of the New York & Co. banner along with Fashion to Figure, and Happy x Nature brands, was losing sales and closing stores well before the COVID-19 crisis began. But the pandemic put tremendous strain on the apparel seller’s finances and operations. With its stores closed and revenue in free fall, RTW went into default with landlords, vendors and its bank, Wells Fargo. In April, its CEO-elect resigned unexpectedly, shortly after being appointed, along with four of the company’s board directors. In June, the retailer said that a bankruptcy was “probable,” and later disclosed it may have to close all of its stores in a Chapter 11 scenario.When the company did file for Chapter 11 in July, it planned to close “a significant portion, if not all” of its physical stores. It also was evaluating a sale of the company’s e-commerce business and related intellectual property. Muji USA was formed in 2006 as a subsidiary of a Japan-based conglomerate that operates retail stores, campsites, cafes, hotels, model house builders and multiple other sectors, selling upwards of 7,000 products. The Muji brand was founded in Japan in 1980 as “an antithesis to the habits of consumer society at that time,” according to Muji USA’s chief restructuring officer, John Bittner, a senior managing director with Mackinac Partners. “On one hand, foreign-made luxury brands were gaining popularity within an economic environment of ever-rising prosperity,” Bittner said in court papers. “On the other hand, poor-quality, low-priced goods were appearing on the market and had a polarizing effect on consumption patterns.” Muji became a “critique” of this state of things, with the aim of selling “products that are useful for the customer and maintain an ideal of the proper balance between living and the objects that make it possible,” Bittner added.Minimalist stores, low prices and an array of products including home goods, beauty, apparel, food and more drew lines to some of Muji’s store openings in the U.S. A New York Times writer once called the retailer’s SoHo store “gloriously affordable.”By the end of 2019, the U.S. subsidiary had more than 20 stores, and it was in financial trouble after overexpanding and picking high-rent spaces in choice locations. At the end of the year, it had a negative cash balance of $26.5 million in its loan arrangement with its parent, according to Bittner. The COVID-19 pandemic would force the company to close all of its stores, deepening its woes. In bankruptcy, Bittner said the company aims to close some stores to rightsize its footprint, restructure its operations and grow its online presence. Muji USA plans to exit bankruptcy within six months.Brooks Brothers for the last nearly two decades has been run by Claudio Del Vecchio, who appreciates its 202-year-old history and its reputation for style and quality. But in that time, casual wear has become increasingly more acceptable for the white-collar professionals who are its customer base.The pandemic has tamped down demand further as people continue to work from home, interrupting a turnaround plan that has included seeking a buyer willing and able to provide the necessary resources. That’s still the plan, and analysts say the retailer should be able to easily find a new owner, thanks to brand strength that has endured for more than two centuries despite the upheaval in apparel sales. WHP Global, Authentic Brands Group and Simon Property Group — the latter recently retracted a lawsuit over unpaid rent — have all been named in press reports as potential suitors.Since its founding in Seattle’s Pike Place Market in 1972, Sur La Table has grown steadily. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, it had 126 stores along with a relatively robust e-commerce arm and fast-growing, revenue-generating cooking classes. But over the five years leading up to its bankruptcy, the kitchenware specialist suffered revenue declines and a churn of executives. The CEO who authored the company’s first day declaration was the company’s third since 2017. It also had capital expenses from installing commercial-level kitchens for its classes and debt leftover from a leveraged buyout. The pandemic crisis deepened Sur La Table’s troubles and brought threats and eviction proceedings from landlords. The company filed with a plan to close more than 50 stores and sell itself to what would be a third private equity owner in nearly 15 years, a deal that would keep the company, including a pared-down physical retail presence, intact.Founded in 1989, G-Star Raw credits itself with introducing “luxury denim for the streets.” Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, the company operated 31 stores in the U.S., with a flagship on Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills, California. Like scores of other retailers, G-Star had to close its stores when the pandemic hit the U.S., and has since determined to reduce its footprint to around seven stores (though that number could change if landlords are willing to swallow “significant concessions”), according to the company’s CEO. Along with the financial pain of the closures, G-Star’s stores suffered “looting during a period of civil unrest” in May and June. In bankruptcy, G-Star hopes to pare its footprint and emerge focused on its remaining profitable stores. The company has no secured debt, but rather a revolving credit account with its Netherlands-based parent.Lucky Brand was one of two denim specialists to file for bankruptcy in a single day in July. Founded in 1990, the brand and retailer eventually grew to have more than 100 stores and 98 outlets in North America. As the story goes with so many retailers, debt — leftover from a leveraged buyout years earlier — left the company burdened as challenges mounted on store retail and apparel in particular. The COVID-19 pandemic exacerbated those challenges. Executive Chairman Matthew Kaness said at the time of filing that the pandemic and its effects have “severely impacted sales across all channels,” and that business has not fully recovered yet. Liquidity strains from store closures related to the pandemic also disrupted the company’s ability to supply its stores with new inventory. Lucky Brand filed for Chapter 11 with plans to jettison about a dozen unprofitable stores and sell itself for at least $140 million. Going into bankruptcy it had a bid from licensing conglomerate Authentic Brands Group and one of the operating companies Authentic Brands works with.Founded in the middle of the Great Depression, the nutrition store chain that would become GNC is no stranger to economic calamity. But, after years of falling sales trying to trim its debt, the COVID-19 pandemic and economic disruption that came with it proved too much to manage outside of bankruptcy.GNC entered bankruptcy with plans to close up to 1,200 stores. It also had multiple parties willing to take it over. Key lenders agreed to a reorganization plan that would turn over ownership to them. On filing, GNC also had a $760 million offer, agreed to “in principle,” from its largest shareholder, the China-based Harbin Pharmaceutical Group. The alternate plans indicate that multiple parties see value in the retailer’s business and are willing to put up capital to save it.On a February conference call, executives at Tuesday Morning made no mention of financial distress or bankruptcy. The off-pricer had issues, to be sure. The company posted net losses for three years running and added only modest growth to its top line. But when the COVID-19 crisis hit in March, the retailer — much smaller than peers like TJX Cos and Ross Stores — watched as its sales went to nearly nothing after it closed its stores.The company called the pandemic disruption an “insurmountable financial hurdle” that forced it into bankruptcy. The company filed for Chapter 11 with hopes of reorganizing around a footprint about a third smaller than its roughly 700 or so stores. Yet Tuesday Morning did not have a negotiated plan with lenders going into bankruptcy court, leaving the ultimate outcome open-ended for now.Centric’s own brands include Hudson, Robert Graham, Swims, Zac Posen and Avirex. The company also licenses more than 100 well known labels, including Calvin Klein, Tommy Hilfiger, Nautica, Hudson Jeans and Under Armour in apparel; Kate Spade, Michael Kors, All Saints and Jessica Simpson in accessories; and Disney, Marvel, Nickelodeon and Warner Brothers in entertainment. With apparel sales growth down and department stores in decline in recent years, the apparel and accessories brands in particular were no doubt already under pressure when the COVID-19 disease broke out worldwide. CEO Jason Rabin said in a statement that the “pandemic disrupted many of our wholesale accounts’ ordering and constrained our cash flow” but also that the agreement forged with the company’s lenders ahead of its Chapter 11 filing positions it for long-term success.Centric will emerge from Chapter 11 as a private company. Debtor-in-possession financing of $435 million will allow it “to operate without interruption throughout the restructuring process,” according to a company press release.After years of trying to engineer a lasting turnaround with mounting losses and constant sales declines, bankruptcy speculation turned into bankruptcy reality for the 118-year-old retailer. Executives painted a picture of a company on the mend until the COVID-19 crisis hit, but J.C. Penney’s challenges were numerous, hefty and persistent well before the pandemic.Still, the pandemic hurt. According to the company’s CFO, sales in April were down 88% year over year and store sales approached zero as Penney closed its stores temporarily while the pandemic spread through the U.S. It also derailed talks with lenders that may have helped it manage its balance sheet outside of a court process.The retailer filed for Chapter 11 with support from key lenders for a plan. But even that pre-negotiated plan allows for multiple outcomes: re-organization with debt relief, a potential sale, or liquidation if the company can’t agree on a go-forward business plan with key lenders in July or if it can’t win third-party financing as it preps an exit. Even so, executives project optimism about the retailer’s future, saying Chapter 11 will allow it to make good on turnaround plans and unveiling plans to reduce Penney’s store footprint by nearly a third.After a booming third quarter, Stage Stores went into a financial tailspin shortly after the year started. Its holiday sales fell below expectations, perhaps by a lot. The missed targets led to a liquidity crunch, as well as layoffs, store closures and diminished plans for its conversion to an off-pricer.The owner of the Bealls, Palais Royal, Peebles, Stage and Goody’s department stores announced last year it would convert its remaining stores to its Gordmans model. That was based on encouraging data from stores it had already converted to Gordmans. But the holiday shortfall wrecked those plans. The company at one point considered a store footprint 200 stores smaller than what it planned as recently as the fall, sources told Retail Dive earlier this year.Stage Stores closed its stores this spring after the COVID-19 crisis hit, squeezing liquidity further and acting as the “proverbial ‘nail in the coffin,’” the company’s chief restructuring officer said later in court papers. Wells Fargo also reduced the retailer’s available borrowings under its revolver; meanwhile Stage Stores was hunting for new capital. But none materialized in time.The retailer filed for bankruptcy with plans to liquidate its business entirely, unless a buyer steps up by June to buy the company and keep it operating.The Canadian Aldo Group shoe seller runs 429 stores and has 3,300 employees in the U.S. The company’s vice president of finance, David Galarneau, called the U.S. “instrumental in the company’s climb to recognition,” with its first store opening in the country in 1993. But both the parent company and U.S. business have been in decline. Aldo U.S. posted a net loss of $52.8 million for the 12 months ending February. The company had a plan to turn around by paring its physical footprint in favor of e-commerce and replacing and buffering working capital with an asset-based lending structure.But the COVID-19 crisis derailed those efforts, forcing stores to close and bringing with it both sales declines and production delays in China. Galarneau said that without immediate financial help in bankruptcy, Aldo would be out of cash by the first week of June.In bankruptcy, Aldo hopes to restructure its debt and operations, including through store exits. The U.S. is such an important component of its turnaround effort that Galarneau said in court papers that the parent would not be able to survive if it cannot restructure Aldo U.S.’s debt obligations.Thanks to an albatross of debt from two rounds of private equity buyouts, it’s been difficult for Neiman Marcus Group to invest in innovations the way Nordstrom or even Macy’s have in recent years. The department store sector in general has been down in the dumps for years now, putting any player with extra burdens like that at particular disadvantage.Still, the century-old Dallas-based retailer has maintained fierce loyalty among some very high-spending customers. And, thanks to a virtual styling service that has helped stoke online sales, the retailer rakes in 30% of its sales from online, even before the COVID-19 pandemic hit. The Mytheresa business, however — the subject of much contention in recent years — isn’t part of the Chapter 11 process and “will continue to operate independently,” the company said.The company runs 67 stores across the U.S., including both department store names, so it isn’t over-stored like some rivals, according to one bankruptcy document. But one of its creditors would nevertheless like to shutter as many as 29 stores, as part of a proposed merger with Saks Fifth Avenue, another luxe department store, if one with a somewhat different clientele.The disease outbreak presents further challenges, including signs of weakness in luxury. After declining by about 25% in the first quarter, the global luxury market is expected to slow further, and could contract 20% to 35% this year, according to Bain and Co.Burdened with debt from a private equity buyout, preppy mainstay J. Crew was a bankruptcy risk for years before the COVID-19 crisis hit. Moreover, some observers say the apparel seller had made several style and quality missteps in its merchandising that hurt its brand.The pandemic appears to have been too much for the retailer to manage without help from a court, especially after the crisis derailed an IPO effort for Madewell, which could have provided much-needed debt relief. The company’s COO, Michael Nicholson, said that the company projected a $900 million decline in sales after closing its stores in March. “Though many companies across all industries faced hardships and tumultuous market conditions, [J. Crew was] uniquely and severely impacted as a customer-facing retailer in an already struggling industry,” Nicholson said.The company filed for Chapter 11 in early May with negotiated plans to convert around $1.7 billion in debt to an equity stake in the company, which would turn control over to lenders. J. Crew is also exploring its store footprint, which numbered about 500 stores at the time of filing. As part of J. Crew’s bankruptcy plan, the fast-growing Madewell brand will stay with the company.Last year, the bulk of Canadian outdoor apparel retailer Roots’ stores in the U.S. racked up a CA$6 million loss. The challenges only steepened with COVID-19 as Roots shuttered all of its North American stores.The parent company decided to pull the plug on Roots USA Corporation, putting it in Chapter 7 bankruptcy with plans to close seven stores in the U.S. That includes locations in Boston, Washington, D.C., Chicago, and a pop-up in New York.Roots hasn’t given up entirely on the U.S. market, though. The company said that it “believes a principally eCommerce-based distribution in the near-term is the best approach to continuing to serve its loyal U.S. customer base.” The Canadian parent also took ownership of two U.S. stores in Utah and Michigan with plans to keep them in operation. Those stores in particular “play important roles in the Company’s heritage and have well-established customer bases,” Roots said.Even before the spread of COVID-19 forced True Religion to close its 87 stores, the denim specialist’s sales were in decline and its profits were negative. After shuttering its footprint in response to the pandemic, 80% of its sales disappeared, according to the company. The retailer filed for Chapter 11 seeking new financing and court protection from its rent obligations for 60 days while its stores remained closed. The bankruptcy was True Religion’s second since 2017, when it filed in an effort to ease its balance sheet of debt left over from a private equity buyout. The company’s interim CFO said True Religion planned to open “many” of its stores “as soon as practical.”Founded in 1889, Modell’s spent the early months of 2020 trying to negotiate deals with landlords and vendors to stave off bankruptcy. The retailer hired RBC Capital Markets to pursue a sale of the sporting goods retailer in January, and while the firm reached out to 14 strategic buyers in recent weeks, and had a “potential bidder” for the company in hand, negotiations fell apart March 10, and a day later the retailer filed.In late February, the company announced it would have to close 19 stores unless it could “appropriately restructure the leases,” and CEO Mitchell Modell announced he would offer a minority stake in the business to an interested buyer. That didn’t happen, and the 19 closures turned into a chain-wide liquidation as Modell recognized it would provide “the greatest recovery for our creditors.”Modell’s pointed to a number of factors that influenced its path to bankruptcy, including the shift to e-commerce, competition from big-box and specialty players, and a series of unfortunate short-term events.Art Van Elslander opened the first Art Van location in Detroit in 1959 and eventually grew his business to be one of the leading furniture retailers in the Midwest. However, as competition grew in the space from both online retailers like Amazon and Wayfair, as well as from mass merchants, traditional furniture retailers like Art Van lost market share. Under “extreme market conditions and faced with limited liquidity,” the furniture retailer filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in Delaware.The founder sold his company to private equity firm Thomas H. Lee Partners in March 2017, and later that year Art Van Furniture acquired Pennsylvania-based companies Levin and Wolf.Aside from a going-concern sale of 44 stores and two distribution centers under its Levin and Wolf banners, the retailer — which also operates Art Van, Art Van PureSleep and Scott Shuptrine Interiors — will close all of its locations through going-out-of-business sales.Bluestem Brands’ direct-to-consumer business spans seven brands, two million customers, multiple categories, and various channels, including online, direct mail and telephone. Holdings include the Appleseed’s, Blair, Draper’s & Damon’s, Gettington, Fingerhut, Haband and Old Pueblo Traders brands.Ahead of bankruptcy, the company faced tightening trade terms with suppliers as it struggled financially. That was exacerbated when S&P Global downgraded the company, with analysts citing “our expectation that the company’s operating performance will remain weak amid continued pressures in the retail industry, and our view of liquidity as less than adequate.”The retailer’s liquidity was also hurt by high debt payments and a weak fourth quarter, a restructuring adviser said in court papers. It filed for bankruptcy with an agreement from Cerberus Business Finance for $125 million in debtor-in-possession financing. Cerberus was also a pre-bankruptcy lender and behind the entity BLST Acquisition Company, which has made a $300 million bid for Bluestem to keep it operating as a going concern, and which would set the baseline for an auction, if one is needed.Following nine consecutive quarters of sales declines, Pier 1 in February filed for bankruptcy. The home goods retailer in January announced plans to close up to 450 of its stores, and upon its filing, said it would close its Canadian operations entirely, which would leave it with about 540 locations in total.The company has commitments for approximately $256 million in debtor-in-possession financing from Bank of America, Wells Fargo National Association and Pathlight Capital to help fund it through bankruptcy. Pier 1 also set up a process to sell itself, in whole or in parts, to bidders in bankruptcy. Over the years, Pier 1 lost market share to competitors like Wayfair, TJX’s HomeGoods and mass merchants.After trying to negotiate with landlords for concessions, the parent of the Papyrus, Paper Destiny, American Greetings and Carlton Cards retail stores threw in the towel and opted to liquidate. Founded in 1950 by Marcel and Margrit Schurman, the Schurman group started out as an importer and wholesaler on the principle that there was a U.S. market for “greeting cards and stationery that intersected with the world of fine art,” a restructuring officer for the company said in court papers.But debt from a poorly-timed expansion — ahead of a major decline in mall traffic — as well as capital costs and financial tensions with a major supplier overpowered the retailer. After quietly initiating a full-scale liquidation, it entered Chapter 11 with plans to close its 200-plus stores.Founded in 1982 as a catalog retailer catering to professional women in need of maternity clothes, Destination Maternity became a leading player in a niche market. But declines in the U.S. birth rate and expanded competition, along with mall traffic declines, knocked nearly a third off the retailer’s top line. As it tried to turnaround, the company burned through five CEOs in as many years — each bringing his or her own strategy vision — and went through a bruising board fight. With liquidity drying up, the company put itself on the market this fall and found some interested parties. But Destination Maternity couldn’t find a savior in time to stave off a full financial meltdown. By October, finances were so tight the retailer stopped paying rent on all locations and held back vendor payments. In Chapter 11 now, it plans to continue marketing itself and is eyeing a December auction for the business. A bankruptcy filing for the fast-fashion retailer has been rumored for months, with the company reportedly hiring restructuring advisers in June. Some operations abroad, including in Mainland China, Taiwan and France, were shuttered even earlier. For years, Forever 21 was a fast-fashion juggernaut, doubling down on its cheap prices in 2014 with an even cheaper offshoot, churning out trendy looks that were here today, gone tomorrow.But the company appears to have missed out on two key trends. In an era when sustainability is gaining traction among apparel consumers, Forever 21 has done little to appeal to them. And it bet heavily on brick and mortar rather than e-commerce; The company first launched online in 2005, and now some 16% of its total sales come from there, according to court documents.The company has obtained $275 million in financing from existing lenders with JPMorgan Chase Bank as agent, plus $75 million in new capital from investment firm TPG Sixth Street Partners. But its troubles center around more than finances or channels, according to GlobalData Retail Managing Director Neil Saunders. “The long-term survival of Forever 21 relies on the chain creating a sustainable and differentiated brand,” he said in emailed comments. “This is something that will be very difficult to accomplish in a crowded and competitive sector.”Since April, Fred’s has been shuttering stores at an accelerated rate, with successive announcements totaling over 430 closures. That represented most of the Southern discount and drugstore retailer’s footprint.Fred’s had tried to turn itself around by focusing on higher-margin private label products, reducing SKUs, expanding its alcohol offering and tightening its budget. It has laid off hundreds of employees and sold major assets, including its specialty pharmacy business. But it wasn’t enough to stabilize its spiraling finances.Fred’s filed for Chapter 11 in September with plans to close all stores, liquidate its operations and sell off its remaining pharmacies (about 170 in all).Avenue Stores went into bankruptcy with a plan to wind down all of its remaining 222 stores and sell its e-commerce operation. The filing came after the company, unbeknownst to employees and customers, opted to wind down its physical footprint and held a quiet auction for liquidators to run the going-out-of-business sales. The plus-size women’s apparel retailer was formed more than 30 years ago from the spin-off of Limited Brands’ combined Lerner Woman and Sizes Unlimited units. After spinning off from Limited, it was acquired by Redcats USA, filed for bankruptcy in 2012 and then bought out of bankruptcy by private equity firm Versa Capital Management.Five profitable years followed. But new competition in the plus-size space from mass merchants and fashion stalwarts cut into sales while discounting, dwindling traffic, e-commerce and debt took their toll on the company. A little over one year after A’gaci exited its first Chapter 11, it found itself back in bankruptcy court again. However, this time around the retailer has the intention of closing all of its stores. The San Antonio-based retailer began going-out-of-business sales in early August shortly after filing under Chapter 11 in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Western District of Texas San Antonio Division.At the time of its filing, A’gaci said it expects the majority of store closings to be completed by Aug. 31. Just prior to the retailer filing, it shut down its e-commerce operations, and updated its return and exchange policies. This came as social media users buzzed about notices and locked doors at several of A’gaci’s physical store locations in Texas.In documents filed with the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York, Barneys revealed that all the stores closing have historically operated at a loss. Furthermore, the company has been short on cash and “operating without sufficient liquidity throughout the summer.” The retailer attempted to work with landlords to reduce rents on its properties, which it pointed to as one of the reasons behind its current financial troubles.The company also pointed to problems with sales performance from February to June this year, which decreased revenue by $34 million.Prior to filing Chapter 11, the company was attempting a sale. The retailer has until October to find a buyer or it may liquidate.A little over a year after exiting Chapter 11 on its first go around, Charming Charlie filed for bankruptcy again in July, this time with plans to wind down and close all 261 of its remaining stores.The retailer’s CFO said “onerous” leases, issues with inventory and vendors, and the continuing slowdown in brick-and-mortar retail left it unable to support its capital and cost structure.Founded in 2004 by Charles Chanaratsopon, the retailer made its name largely by its approach to merchandising, grouping products together by color and pricing them between department stores like Macy’s and teen retailers like Claire’s.Going out of business sales at the accessories and apparel retailer are expected to yield $30 million in revenue. At the time of filing, the company had 856 full-time and 2,486 part-time employees.Z Gallerie is a home decor retailer headquartered in Los Angeles with 76 stores nationwide, operating in a space that’s sitting in the midst of disruption. Subject to court approval, the business will have $28 million debtor-in-possession financing from secured lender KeyBank National Association.Outside of the announced 17 store closures, Z Gallerie is expected to keep physical locations and its website open and operational through the duration of bankruptcy processes, pending funding approval by the courts. Court documents state that the retailer estimates up to $500 million in assets.Diesel USA is a subsidiary of its parent company, Diesel S.p.A. Along with 28 stores, the business has wholesale partnerships with a variety of retailers including Nordstrom Rack, Saks Fifth Avenue and Amazon.com, among others.The company cited a number of factors that led to its bankruptcy filing, including a decrease in wholesale orders, a dramatic decline in net sales and instances of theft and fraud. Prior to filing the retailer attempted to renegotiate leases with landlords and will not pursue the renewal of leases on a number of underperforming locations. According to the filing, “closing certain expensive, long-term, and underperforming stores as well as obtaining relief from other burdensome executory contracts is crucial to its ability to continue operating.”Diesel USA has additional plans to revamp its e-commerce platform and grow wholesale operations.The discount shoe company spent last year closing down some 900 stores and cutting jobs at its headquarters after emerging from bankruptcy late in 2017. That plan was agreed to by lenders, which at that point largely owned the company. Without a buyer in sight, though, the business now is mostly disintegrating, and its wind-down has been swift so far. The retailer operates about 3,400 stores in more than 40 countries, a footprint that Stephen Marotta, appointed last month as the company’s chief restructuring officer, said in a statement contributed to its demise, and is closing a massive number of them — nearly half the store closures that Coresight Research recently estimated the U.S. would see this year.“We expect all stores to remain open until at least the end of March and the majority will remain open until May,” a spokesperson told Retail Dive in an email. “This process does not affect the Company’s franchise operations or its Latin American stores, which remain open for business as usual.”As Things Remembered prepped for bankruptcy, it was also apparently working out a deal that could preserve at least some of its retail operations and jobs — the company otherwise reportedly faced the closure of most of its 400 stores. The retailer announced the sale and the filing the same day.It was a close call for the 40-year-old retailer, which was acquired in 2012 by private equity firm Madison Dearborn from two other PE firms. Madison Dearborn exited that investment in 2017, the firm last month told Retail Dive in an email. Like many PE-backed retailers, Things Remembered, which last year attempted to boost sales through an Amazon storefront, is burdened with debt, which Reuters last month pegged at about $120 million. Leadership has also been upended more than once, as several top employees have come and gone in recent years, according to the LinkedIn pages of past executives.As a mall-based, teen apparel retailer owned by private equity (acquired by Advent International in 2009 in a $380 million take-private buyout), Charlotte Russe joins other embattled retailers hampered in a turnaround. Already under pressure to notch sales, the debt level creates a situation that “doesn’t work,” according to Greg Portell, lead partner in the global consumer and retail practice of strategy and management consulting firm A.T. Kearney.″[T]hese aren’t companies whose growth will outpace debt service,” he said in comments emailed to Retail Dive, adding that it’s a distraction from their basic task of retailing. “While it’s true that consumer preferences are changing, successful retailers are those that can adapt to those tastes and curate goods and experiences consumers value. Retailing is not an easy exercise. Beyond the financial aspect, it requires talented merchants, skilled store labor and an inspirational vision.”Even less hobbled retailers are struggling to keep up with disruption in the sector, but those like Charlotte Russe, distracted by their financial difficulties, including their real estate, are destined to fall even further behind. “Beyond the financial aspect, it requires talented merchants, skilled store labor and an inspirational vision,” Portell said. “Without those attributes, retailers will struggle. Without bold action, the retail landscape will continue to be scattered with bankruptcies.”Plus-size apparel retailer FullBeauty announced in early January that it was expecting to file Chapter 11. In a surprise move, the company filed and received approval on a restructuring plan in 24 hours. The company agreed to turn over control to its lenders and slashed $900 million in debt, according to court documents.In between filing and receiving approval for the restructuring plan, U.S. Trustee William Harrington filed an objection, stating that they company was rushing through the Chapter 11 too quickly. Those objections were overruled.After months of rumor and speculation, Gymboree filed its second bankruptcy in as many years in mid-January. Through the Chapter 11 process, the children’s retailer is shedding its unsuccessful brands, something a few analysts were surprised didn’t happen during the retailer’s last bankruptcy, and plans to sell the still-relevant Janie and Jack brand, as well as the IP and online platform for Gymboree. CEO Shaz Kahng noted in a statement that the retailer would be using the bankruptcy process to “preserve” the Janie and Jack brand, despite having to let go of both its namesake brand and the lower-priced Crazy 8 brand.In its second life, Gymboree faced intense pressure from rivals like The Children’s Place, as well as from big-box retailers like Target and even discount players like T.J. Maxx. The retailer also pointed to Gap as a direct competitor and noted that its secondary competitors are selling clothes “at increasingly cheaper prices.” Competition impacted the amount of traffic the retailer received, which led to discounting and slimmer profits, per court documents, and the consumer shift to online didn’t help either.Shopko is in the middle of an unfolding story about debt and assets. In December it was announced that the Midwestern retailer was closing 39 stores shortly after Debtwire revealed that the retailer was exploring restructuring. A few weeks later, pharmaceutical drug supplier McKesson Corporation filed a lawsuit alleging that Shopko owed the company $67 million after it “would not commit to any future date on which Shopko would be able to make payment,” according to court documents. By mid-January the retailer filed for Chapter 11, announced additional store closures and obtained $480 million in financing from lenders to continue business operations throughout the bankruptcy process. Walgreens then won 63 stores during an auction of the retailer’s pharmacy assets.The court documents originally filed by McKesson allege that the retailer, “ceased making payments to multiple other vendors,” and “has stopped paying numerous other creditors.” McKesson declined further comment on those allegations.Making and selling bedding has become a nightmare in the U.S. as disruptive material and sales innovations from bed-in-box startups like Casper continue to undermine traditional store-based mattress sales in the U.S. Innovative Mattress Solutions, which runs the Sleep Outfitters, Mattress Warehouse and Mattress King brands, is hardly alone: Ubiquitous retailer Mattress Firm is in the process of shuttering some 700 stores after filing Chapter 11 last fall.IMS has significantly fewer stores — all told its banners operate 142 specialty sleep retail locations, primarily in the southeastern U.S. — and last year contributed less than 2% of the Tempur Sealy’s global net sales. Still, Tempur Sealy CEO Scott Thompson earlier this month called the businesses retail footprint “overextended” and its capital structure “thin,” with neither “designed to effectively respond to the competitive pressures of the recent retail environment.”While legacy businesses in the market count sheep, the disruptors are busy counting sales. Leader Casper started off last year with plans to open its first standalone store and has expanded that to plans for 200 across North America after inking deals with Target and Nordstrom. Rivals Tuft & Needle, Leesa, Nest and Purple have partnered with legacy retailers and Amazon, which itself moved into the space last year with its own affordable and premium mattress options.The first weekend after the new year began, Beauty Brands filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, saying it had entered into an asset purchase agreement with Hilco Merchant Resources for the sale of its operating assets. At the time of the filing, the retailer owed $6.9 million on a secured loan and $11 million in unsecured debt to suppliers and landlords.Just before filing, the retailer had announced the closure of 25 stores, which it plans to liquidate through Chapter 11. The retailer plans to sell the remaining 33, though CEO Caryn Lerner noted at the time that all stores remained open and that the company’s objective was to “emerge from Chapter 11 in a stronger position and move forward as a successful brand.”Among other things, the company pointed to an unsuccessful brand repositioning attempt, which caused it to open 11 new format store locations between 2014 and 2016 and led to significant operating losses as those stores underperformed. The story comes at a time when many beauty retailers are performing well, and startups like Glossier and Birchbox are making ever more ambitious moves into the space.With over 65 years of experience, David’s Bridal was once a leader in the wedding apparel space. Now the retailer is struggling to keep up with a changing industry.The company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on Nov. 19 and announced a restructuring process that includes $60 million in secured financing and a $125 million asset-loan to keep stores open. In a video on the company’s website, CEO Scott Key assured customers that all 300 locations will continue operations and orders will be delivered as promised.Even though David’s Bridal claims to sell one-third of U.S. bridal dresses, the company has faced a steady increase in apparel competition. The casualization of weddings, positioning itself at a mid-range price point and the need to invest in larger digital capabilities has also dimmed the retailer’s effectiveness. “Bridal retail is a difficult segment,” said Raya Sokolyanska, VP senior analyst at Moody’s Corporation, in an interview with Retail Dive. “It was always a tough business to run, but is now tougher.”Sears has been bleeding money and customers for years. Its Chapter 11 filing, when it came, surprised no one, except perhaps by its timing. The company has beaten bankruptcy speculation in the past as former CEO Eddie Lampert (and majority owner) loaned the retailer hundreds of millions out of his hedge fund, ESL Investments. Lampert also kept Sears afloat through asset sales, store closures and thousands of layoffs meant to ease Sears’ bottom line.In 2018 alone, Sears borrowed millions from Lampert’s fund, ESL Investments, closed more than 200 stores, laid off hundreds of corporate employees, refinanced debt, cut a deal over its private label credit card that brought in millions and contemplated a sale of the Kenmore appliance brand and home services unit to Lampert and ESL.But, in the end, it wasn’t enough to keep Sears out of bankruptcy court. When it filed, Sears said it expected to close an additional 142 stores by the end of the year and reorganize around its remaining profitable stores (which numbered at about 400, according to the company’s chief financial officer) and sell them as a going concern. Meanwhile, Lampert’s ESL is in talks with the retailer about a bid for those stores.Mattress Firm (owned by Steinhoff International Holdings) filed for bankruptcy Oct. 5 with a plan to close 700 underperforming stores, 200 of which were slated to close just days after the company filed Chapter 11.In an increasingly competitive market, Mattress Firm had been facing challenges from e-commerce startups like Casper (which have won over customers with lower prices, convenient delivery and playful marketing), not to mention working through the loss of key supplier Tempur-Pedic, which stopped selling at Mattress Firm in 2017 after contract negotiations fell through, and filed a lawsuit in August claiming Mattress Firm was selling “confusingly similar” products to its own. The retailer was also carrying the weight of an 11.2% drop in revenue in fiscal 2017.Mattress Firm entered bankruptcy with a restructuring plan, under which the retailer hopes to shed unprofitable stores and improve its product offering. The company also released projections for profits of $200 million by fiscal 2020, assuming that 40% of the sales it’s losing from closed stores will be recaptured by nearby Mattress Firm locations.Founded in 1891 in San Francisco, Samuels Jewelers in August notched its fourth trip to Chapter 11 in just over 25 years. Now headquartered in Austin, Texas, the retailer runs more than 120 stores in the U.S. as well as an e-commerce site. A couple years after its most recent trip through Chapter 11, in the early 2000s, the jewelry seller was bought out by Indian company Gitanjali Gems, whose chairman has in recent years become the target of a criminal probe in India for allegedly defrauding multiple banks in the country, according to a bankruptcy filing.That was just the latest twist in a harrowing couple of years for Samuels, which has seen declining sales and widening operating losses (to the tune of $14.9 million for its most recent fiscal year). Ahead of filing for Chapter 11, the retailer won an agreement for bankruptcy financing as well as an agreement with liquidation firms Gordon Brothers and Hilco to sell excess inventory in order to pay off debt. Meanwhile, a representative for the company said in court papers that Samuels hopes to sell itself as an operating business during the court process.The owner of the Fallas chain of discount stores suffered financial setbacks from certain underperforming stores, exacerbated by severe weather in various regions, including by Hurricane Maria, resulting in what it called “prolonged, temporary closure of damaged stores and loss of revenue.” Before filing for Chapter 11, the company said it also suffered further financial losses from its acquisition of Conway Stores and from a data breach.CEO Michael Fallas said in a release after filing that the retailer was “historically a profitable company” and was committed to returning to profitability and financial help through the Chapter 11 process. “Our goal is to emerge a reorganized Company poised to compete in an evolving industry so that we can continue to serve the communities where we are rooted,” he added. The company also said it was working with creditors and vendors to hash out a reorganization plan in bankruptcy.Known for its oddball electronics, gifts, travel gear and other assorted doodads, Brookstone has faced the same foot-traffic problems as other mall chains. The company filed for Chapter 11 on Aug. 2 with plans to sell itself and close all 101 remaining mall-based stores in bankruptcy “following continued deterioration of traditional retail mall traffic.”As Brookstone winds down its mall presence, it plans to restructure around its 35 airport stores as well as its e-commerce and wholesale businesses. Brookstone CEO Piau Phang Foo said those three businesses are “operating successfully and should prove attractive to a buyer with the financial resources and vision to carry our company into the future.” To fund it through Chapter 11, Brookstone secured agreements to $30 million in bankruptcy financing from Wells Fargo and Gordon Brothers.Brookstone began as a direct marketer, placing its first advertisement for “hard-to-find-tools” in Popular Mechanics in 1965. After growing a catalog business, Brookstone opened its first brick-and-mortar store in New Hampshire in 1973. In 2014, the retailer was nearly sold in Chapter 11 to the parent of Spencer’s, a fellow seller of unique (and amusingly nonessential) wares. Instead, it went to a joint venture between the China-based firms Sailing Capital and Sanpower Group for $174 million.Since its founding in 1971, the comfort footwear brand Rockport Group has changed hands several times, moving from Reebok to Adidas to New Balance and Berkshire Partners,who in turn sold it to a group of the company’s lenders.After playing for decades in the bruising and competitive footwear space, the company went through a series of supply chain mishaps that wreaked havoc on its balance sheet and operations. Rockport filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy with a plan for private equity firm Charlesbank to take over ownership of Rockport’s global wholesale assets, e-commerce platform and retail operations in Asia and Europe. It would also have the option to take over the company’s North American retail operation and keep open stores it wanted, while using Chapter 11 to close unwanted stores.At the time of filing, Rockport operated eight full-price and 19 outlet stores in the U.S. and had $287 million in debt liabilities.The department store doldrums took their toll on Nine West. The company — which was founded in the 1970s by Jerome Fisher and Vince Camuto, who had the idea of manufacturing shoes on the cheap overseas and selling them in New York at lower prices — made 80% of its sales as a wholesaler. Unfortunately, Nine West made many of those sales to department stores, including Bon-Ton, Sears and Macy’s — one of which is bankrupt, another has been teetering on the edge of financial disaster for years and the other is in relatively healthy shape but still closing stores by the dozens.For years the women’s fashion retailer and wholesaler has been losing market share amid softening apparel sales and competition from e-commerce players. Nine West in 2016 got a reprieve from its lenders in order to help it ride out the holidays in preparation for 2017. Also that year, sources told Bloomberg that restructuring firms had approached Nine West with proposals to reduce its debt. In May last year, the company announced it had retained investment bank Lazard to evaluate a long-term capital structure solutionLast year, the brand’s customer loyalty started to waiver dangerously, according to data from mobile marketing platform inMarket emailed to Retail Dive. Except for a slight rebound in October, loyalty continued to decrease in the third quarter, and has edged down slightly each month, including during the holidays.Nine West entered Chapter 11 with $1.6 billion in debt and a $200 million stalking horse bid from Authentic Brands for its flagship and Bandolino brands. Creditors planned to take over the remaining business, including One Jeanswear, Kasper and Anne Klein apparel brands as well as Nine West’s jewelry business, all of which the company said were profitable and growing. Nine West’s CEO said at the time of filing that it had already removed inventory and vacated almost all of its remaining brick-and-mortar stores.Teen and tween-focused Claire’s Stores calls itself a “girl’s best friend,” with over 100 million ears pierced under its banner, but girls and young women have plenty other options these days. Among them are H&M, Forever 21 and Zara, as well as discount and online players.Trying to free up cash and stem losses, the company closed 166 storesin 2016, a year in which the company posted net income of $53.9 million compared to a net loss of $236.4 million in 2015. For 2017, the company said it expected EBITDA of $212 million, up nearly 13% from 2016 and sales of $1.3 billion, which is roughly flat from the year before.Even as the company showed positive cash flow, it said that much of its cash went to paying debt, making competing with fast fashion, discount and online that much harder. Like many retailers in trouble,private equity ownershipadded to Claire’s Stores’ woes. Apollo Global Management took Claire’s private in 2007 in a $3.1 billion leveraged buyout. The retailer had refinanced some debtto delay interest payments, but it wasn’t enough.The company filed for Chapter 11 March 19with a restructuring plan agreed to by a group of its largest lenders. Under the plan, Claire’s would reduce its overall indebtedness by $1.9 billion, the company said. The plan would also give current lenders a stake in the reorganized retailer through a new equity investment of $250 million. Claire’s said it expects to complete the Chapter 11 process by September and would exit with $150 million in liquidity.This is The Walking Company’s second trip to bankruptcy court in a decade. Founded in 1991, as a retailer of European “comfort shoes,” Walking Company — which includes the FootSmart and Big Dogs Sportswear banners — eventually expanded into malls across the country and broadened its focus to include more shoe types as well as clothing and lifestyle products. In 2008, it filed after a rapid store expansion ran into a massive recession. It emerged from Chapter 11 with its core business significantly improved, and then 10 years later ran into another sector downturn.Leading up to its 2018 filing, the company tried to renegotiate its store lease terms to lighten its rent burdens, but had only limited success in the effort. It also suffered when Wells Fargo significantly devalued the inventory that backed a major loan and when a key vendor stopped supplying its successful private label line.Walking Company entered bankruptcy in March with agreements for new investments and financing, and a clear path out of bankruptcy. Key to its future will be negotiations with landlords in Chapter 11 and, more importantly, making good on the new cash to adapt its model to keep up with customers and secular changes in retail.Bon-Ton Stores, with roots going back to the 19th century, is still tightly connected to its founding family. Once privately held and mainly debt-free, it went public and expanded over the past two decades. Today it has a debt load many see as unsustainable as its sales contract in a troubled department store sector.Bon-Ton entered 2017 under financial pressure, but many analysts thought the company had the liquidity to muddle through the year and into its next debt maturities in 2018. But as the bad news about the company flowed, the bankruptcy chatter grew louder. The retailer’s suppliers reportedly began pressing for tighter terms on shipments to the retailer last fall. In September, the retailer hired AlixPartners for help with its turnaround efforts and began a search for a financial adviser to help with a possible debt restructuring. In bankruptcy court, the retailer disclosed it had also gone looking for a prospective buyer starting in late 2017, but no formal interest materialized.In December, Bon-Ton failed to make a multimillion dollar interest payment, entering into a grace period that eventually lapsed as the company negotiated with its lenders. The retailer filed for Chapter 11 on Feb. 4 with agreements for more than $700 million in bankruptcy financing to keep the lights on. The company won court approval for the new financing soon after — over the objections from some bondholders calling for Bon-Ton to liquidate immediately in bankruptcy, calling the retailer’s prospects for survival in a shrinking department store sector “at best, uncertain, and in reality, unlikely.”The subsidiary of an international beauty retailer, Kiko USA played in a healthy and innovative beauty sector but had hitched its fortunes to malls.As mall traffic and brick-and-mortar sales declined, the makeup seller launched a new line of business selling through Amazon and using its “Fulfillment by Amazon” program. That business, together with Kiko’s own website, was growing in the double digits ahead of the company’s Chapter 11 filing. But physical sales shrank too fast for Kiko to adjust its cost base through lease negotiations. The company filed for bankruptcy protection in January with plans to close all but five of its domestic retail locations by the end of February.Kiko USA’s CEO said in a court filing that the retailer has a strategic plan that focuses on its offerings, remaining stores and e-commerce business.A’gaci’s recent physical expansion was particularly poorly timed — it came just as mall traffic started declining. After building out 21 new stores over the past two years, A’gaci is now looking to close 49 stores — almost 65% of its footprint — in bankruptcy.Along with bad timing, the women’s fashion retailer also suffered from bad luck. The company’s CEO said in a court filing that major hurricanes last year “ravaged” some of the retailer’s most profitable stores. The retailer’s earnings fell by $7.2 million in the past year, and the timing of the earnings hit was also terrible — it came as a major debt maturity loomed in 2018. The hurricanes, earnings hit, overexpansion and problems with a business software system roll out all worked together pushed the company to file for bankruptcy protection in January.Now the retailer, founded in 1971 and boasts, is looking to shrink its physical footprint and focus on its more profitable stores.Founded in 2004, Charming Charlie made a name for itself by organizing accessories and jewelry assortments by color and pricing its products in a “sweet spot” between more upscale retailers like Macy’s and specialty sellers like Claire’s that cater to younger shoppers. It grew into a retailer with more than $400 million in sales. Backed by private equity firms TSG Consumer Partners and Hancock Park Associates, the company has struggled of late to pay off its debt after a period of rapid expansion.Last year, the retailer reportedly explored a debt restructuring after it “failed to establish sufficient scale to compete in a highly fragmented market that has been tested by the rise of internet shopping and rapidly changing consumer tastes,” according to Reuters. The company’s outlook has fallen sharply since then. The retailer plans to shutter nearly one third of its 370 store fleet by the end of the year as it also cuts some corporate staff.The 20-year-old retailer based in Anaheim, CA has over 160 mall and outlet stores, according to the company’s website, but in early November, a lawyer representing Styles For Less told Reuters that some stores have already begun to shutter. It’s not yet clear how many more will need to close as the company restructures its mounting debt. It’s liabilities lie between $10 million and $50 million.Like other teen apparel chains that have found themselves in bankruptcy court this year, Styles for Less has suffered as mall traffic has declined and as logoed T-shirts have fallen out of style. One of the biggest problems ailing these retailers is a lack of differentiation from their competitors and a failure to promote a strong brand identity that aligns with Gen Z.Many saw the company’s mounting debt — a legacy of its acquisition by Kohlbergon Kravis Roberts, Bain Capital Partners and Vornado Realty Trust — as unsustainable, especially in a quickly evolving retail world and toy market. Toys R Us has been trying to compete against mass merchants, who have put pricing pressure on the box retailer, and online players. The company just this summer revamped its website, and it has been struggling for years with declining store sales.In a court document, CEO David Brandon said the company’s debt service payments have been gobbling up around $400 million in cash every year, making it impossible to keep up with modern competition in the toy retail market. If Toys R Us can emerge from bankruptcy with less debt and money to reinvest in its business, the process could mark a turning point.Aerosoles has been trying to find a sweet spot between its reputation for comfort and its appeal as a retailer of affordable footwear to include more fashion-forward options and higher prices. Denise Incandela, who has held executive roles at Saks Fifth Avenue and Ralph Lauren, replaced CEO R. Shawn Neville in April, and said that the Chapter 11 filing will enable the company to improve its financial structure and right-size its retail footprint, in order to refocus its turnaround strategy.Investment firm Palladin Retail Partners added Aerosoles to its stable of retail and apparel companies in 2014: The footwear company has had three chief executives since. With 120 retail locations, the brand had a performance vibe early on. The idea was to be able to walk from home to the subway and work without resorting to wearing one’s sneakers, but the brand’s appeal has faltered of late, and the tough apparel market has taken its toll.Vitamin World has closed 45 underperforming stores since early 2016, when it tapped RCS Real Estate Advisers to review its “above market rents.” That saved the company $2 million in profit, according to court documents. But it wasn’t enough to stave off bankruptcy and, as the retailer’s CEO previously told media, not all landlords would play ball as Vitamin World tried to negotiate rents and leases.Vitamin World Chief Financial Officer Frank Conley said in a court filing that the retailer also suffered “significant supply chain and ingredient availability issues” that hurt sales and crimped liquidity during the transition away from its previous owner, NBTY Inc., a supplement manufacturer. The company owes a total of $14.4 million in accrued interest on secured debt and another $9.5 million on a seller note originating from the company’s 2016 buyout by a private equity company. The retailer’s inventory is valued at around $30 million.Perfumania has been “working diligently to amend its business model, reduce its cost structure, improve supply chain efficiency, optimize marketing, reduce expenses and improve operating results long-term,” according to CEO Michael Katz. In the first quarter of this year, the company closed 43 stores, and its bankruptcy filing is meant to accelerate those efforts, Katz said. The retailer’s total debt, according to its bankruptcy filings, sits at $253.9 million. Meanwhile, sales have been declining — in fiscal 2016, they fell by 13.5% to $468.9 million compared to the prior-year period. Losses, too, have been widening, from 75 cents a share in 2015 to $1.53 a share last year. In its most recently reported quarter, Perfumania saw its amount of cash and cash equivalents fall by 76%.In Ch. 11, the company hopes to not just reduce its expenses but transform into more of a digital retailer, with an emphasis on its e-commerce business and omnichannel initiatives that will enhance and create a more seamless shopping experience.Alfred Angelo Piccione and Edythe Piccione founded the bridal business in Philadelphia in the 1930s and it was later run by their children and based out of Delray Beach, FL. The company recently held 61 stores nationwide, as well as stores in Japan, Spain, the Netherlands, France, the U.K., Canada and Australia. Many of its designs, which included “special occasion” dresses for bridesmaids and others, were sold by more than 1,400 retailers globally.On June 29, Alfred Angelo’s headquarters faced an eviction lawsuit over unpaid rent, according to the South Florida Business Journal, and on July 14 the company posted a notice on its website acknowledging it had filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy, which entails a full liquidation of its assets. Sudden store closures created chaos for patrons who had already ordered gowns and showed up at the shops to find them closed. “As a result, all stores and wholesalers are closed,” according to the company.Southern California retailer True Religion, founded in 2002, once held a respectable reputation for quality, designer denim. But as the athleisure trend took hold and consumer tastes shifted toward yoga pants over the last several years, the jeans maker struggled to retain its once popular business. By 2016, the company became burdened by some $500 million in debt and hired law firm Kirkland & Ellis LLP to explore restructuring options, according to Business of Fashion.Efforts to rejuvenate the business, however, have been fruitless. In February, Moody’s Investors Service pegged the brand as one at risk of filing for bankruptcy protection due to factors like stressed liquidity, weak quantitative credit profiles, challenged competitive positions, sponsor ownership and erratic management structure. The retailer ultimately filed for bankruptcy protection on July 5, signing a restructuring agreement with lenders to erase $350 million in debt, while keeping stores open and growing its digital business, True Religion CEO John Ermatinger, said in a statement.Papaya Clothing was in part a victim of its own success. After opening in 1999, the teen apparel retailer opened some 50 of the 80 stores it now operates during the past six years. From the chief financial officer’s account, Papaya was successful. It brings in about $134 million in sales, boasts a rapid product development timeline and consistently leads its category in sales per square foot of space. But it ran into the broader retail slowdown and faced heady competition from e-commerce, fast fashion off-price retailers. It filed for bankruptcy in June as it faced liquidity issues, in part due to the costs and debt from its rapid expansion.Like Gymboree and rue 21, Papaya hopes to remain in operation. Papaya has asked the court for the ability to exit some 30 leases. The retailer also asked for leeway to honor potentially hundreds of thousands of dollars in outstanding customer discounts, returns and loyalty rewards as it looks to restructure its debt and stay up to date on utility payments and other obligations.Children’s retailer Gymboree filed for Chapter 11 in June, after missing an interest payment on outstanding bonds and ahead of the maturity of loans worth hundreds of millions of dollars. The debt was a legacy of private equity firm Bain Capital’s leveraged buyout of the company in 2010. Adding to the company’s financial woes were suppliers —jittery about the company’s finances and news of then-CEO Mark Breitbard’s departure — demanding stricter payment and shipment terms.Gymboree’s sales had sagged amid declining mall traffic and competition from off-pricers, Target, e-commerce sellers and retailers in its own niche, namely The Children’s Place and Carter’s. Despite these headwinds and financial woes, Gymboree’s creditors see value in the company as a retailer. They’ve agreed to reduce the company’s debt load by $900 million and inject debtor-in-possession capital so Gymboree can keep operating. But the company will certainly shrink, with plans to shut as many as 450 stores in bankruptcy. Meanwhile, the company’s competitors are poised to snatch up any forgone sales as Gymboree closes stores. The main beneficiary is likely to be The Children’s Place, which overlaps broadly with Gymboree stores. Gymboree hopes to emerge from bankruptcy in a matter of months.In April, teen apparel retailer Rue21 began shuttering some 400 stores nationwide, about a third of its fleet, calling it a “difficult but necessary decision.” That left the retailer with about 800 stores and an e-commerce business. But downsizing wasn’t enough. Ultimately, the company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on May 15, entering into agreements with some lenders to reduce debt and provide additional capital in support of its restructuring efforts, with an aim to keep the company alive.Rue21 has been in the midst of a turnaround since an executive suite shake-up last October by private equity owner Apax Partners shortly after credit ratings firm Fitch Ratings warned Rue21 could slip down the slope to bankruptcy. The company replaced General Merchandise Manager Kim Reynolds as well as CEO Bob Fisch, who together had run the company for some 15 years. The retailer’s situation mirrors the challenges that have plagued many mall-based junior apparel retailers — over expansion, declining mall traffic and a lack of turnaround support from private equity ownership.Discount shoe retailer Payless filed for Chapter 11 April 4 that CEO W. Paul Jones called it a “difficult, but necessary, decision” prompted by a challenging retail environment, which he said will only intensify. The company immediately announced plans to close 400 stores as part of an effort to “work to aggressively manage the remaining real estate lease portfolio.” The store closure target doubled more than a month later, with 800 of the 4,400 stores Payless operated as of April. At the time of bankruptcy, Payless also agreed with a majority group of its term loan holders to reduce its debt load by almost 50% as well as its lower annual cash interest costs.Payless, founded in 1956 in Topeka, Kansas, reinvented shoe retail by introducing a no-frills, self-service approach that let it sell at lower prices. But the concept is no longer new and exciting to consumers, as the old-fashioned shoe salesperson is now relegated to department stores (and even Macy’s is phasing those out) and some specialty stores. Payless is also yet another victim of a leveraged buyout, after it was acquired in 2012 by private equity firms Blum Capital and Golden Gate.Gander Mountain filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on March 10 with immediate plans to close 30 stores and offer itself up on the auction block. The outdoor and sporting goods chain, like others that have fallen into bankruptcy this year, had gone through a rapid expansion in the years befor the retail slowdown. Since 2012 the company opened or announced some 60 new stores, and at one point operated 162 locations in 27 states. That was on top of its direct-to-consumer catalog internet business and the Overton’s e-commerce retail unit from Greenville, North Carolina. But the company, like Sports Authority and Eastern Outfitters before it, ran headlong into widening competition in its sector that includes the likes of Dick’s and Cabela’s.On May 1, Camping World Holdings, an Illinois-based network of RV-centric retail locations and outdoor-related services, announced it had won the bankruptcy auction for Gander Mountain and Overton. The sale topped $37 million and included a host of assets, among them real estate leases, intellectual property rights, operating systems and platforms, distribution center equipment, e-commerce businesses, and fixtures and equipment. Shortly after the court approved the sale, Camping World announced it would keep open 70 of Gander Mountain’s 126 then-remaining stores.Founded just over 100 years ago and once known as Richman Gordmans, Omaha, Nebraska-based Gordmans Stores was once a fixture in the Midwest. But the discount department store did not adapt well to changing consumer demand for e-commerce, only launching a website in 2015. Gordmans was purchased by private equity firm Sun Capital in 2008 and expanded its store fleet rapidly, mirroring the expansion of department stores like J.C. Penney and Macy’s at the time.In recent years, Gordman’s has been plagued by declining foot traffic and plummeting sales. Sales fell 75% in the past year alone, and in January, the company announced an unspecified number of job cuts amid “the current sluggish retail environment.” In March, the company ran 106 stores in 62 markets and 22 states and carried a debt load of about $85 million.That month, speculation of an imminent bankruptcy caught wind, and the retailer eventually filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection mid-March, also announcing a slew of job cuts. Just weeks later, ex-Gordmans CEO (and the founder’s great-grandson) Jeff Gordman challenged regional department store chain Stage Stores in a bid to regain control of his family company. Ultimately, Stage Stores won the rights to Gordmans intellectual property, about 50 store leases, a distribution center and inventory for an undisclosed amount.Once a star of niche retail and a veritable nerd mecca, the nearly 100-year-old company is now on its second bankruptcy and the regular butt of internet jokes about its sad liquidation sales. On March 8 RadioShack filed for Chapter 11, again, after having emerged from bankruptcy two years ago as a private company through a sale to hedge fund Standard General.With the March filing came plans to close 200 stores and to evaluate its options for the remaining 1,300. CEO Dene Rogers blamed poor performance of mobility sales for thwarting further progress for the retailer. RadioShack also failed to find any way to dent the increasing dominance of Amazon, which accounted for a whopping 90% of the $5.6 billion growth in U.S. consumer electronics in 2015, according to Deutsche Bank. At the time of the March bankruptcy announcement, RadioShack was reported to be in talks with Sprint, which helps run about a third of its brick-and-mortar operations in co-branded stores, to evaluate its options for stores.Aside from booksellers, electronics retailers were some of the most notable victims to be wiped out by Amazon’s e-commerce dominance. Amazon accounted for a whopping 90% of the $5.6 billion growth in consumer electronics sales posted nationwide in 2015, according to a note last year from Deutsche Bank analysts, and Hhgregg was unable to face down the competition.The electronics, home furnishings and appliance retailer, founded in Indiana in 1955, became a multi-regional chain in the late 20th century. As competition heated up in the space, from Amazon as well as Best Buy, Sears and J.C. Penney, CEO Robert Riesbeck took measures in 2016 to shake up the company’s senior management, expand its free delivery options, boost digital efforts and streamline the supply chain. On March 3 2017, the retailer announced a 40% reduction in its store fleet, some 88 underperforming stores and three distribution centers, resulting in 1,500 job cuts. News of the turnaround came amid reports of an imminent bankruptcy filing, which was ultimately filed three days later. At the time, Hhgregg said it had lined up an anonymous buyer (which appeared to be the retailer’s ad agency Zimmerman Advertising). But by the end of March, the company acknowledged the deal had collapsed. A month later, the retailer threw in the towel, receiving court approval for a plan to close its remaining 220 stores and liquidate its assets.BCBG Max Azria Group had been floundering for years leading up to its bankruptcy filing on March 1. The brand portfolio struggled to win a following and maintain sales while the company struggled under a debt load that by 2013 had risen to $685 million. Longtime investor Guggenheim Partners was responsible for $475 million of that. In 2015, BCBG received $135 million from investors to help restructure that debt, but problems persisted. In January 2017, the company hired business management consultant AlixPartners to tackle the challenge. By the beginning of New York Fashion Week in February 2017, BCBG, a 20-year veteran of the show, was making headlines for bankruptcy buzz rather than its clothing.On June 9 BCBG announced that two companies in a stalking horse bid — Marquee Brands and Global Brands Group Holding Ltd. — would buy for an undisclosed amount most of its assets in bankruptcy. Per the plan, Marquee would acquire the intellectual property of the flagship BCBG brand, and Global Brands would acquire assets associated with the operation of the BCBG business. Many saw the outcome as the most hopeful in the rash of recent retail bankruptcies, with the long-respected BCBG Max Azria brand kept alive by its buyers.Grand Forks, North Dakota-based Vanity was founded as a private company in the 1950s selling apparel and accessories for young women. By 2013, its store fleet had grown to 170 stores in 26 states. But the good times wouldn’t last.By March 2017, the mall-based specialty apparel retailer succumbed to declining foot traffic and changing consumer demands, and began advertising a “going out of business” sale. That month it filed to reorganize under bankruptcy protection with a plan to shutter all of its stores. While a restructure is still pending, its e-commerce website is currently disabled although it promises shoppers, “We’ll be back soon!” Whether it will, remains to be seen.Eastern Mountain Sports, founded in 1967 in Massachusetts by two climbers, and Connecticut-based discount retailer Bob’s Stores were once popular sellers of outdoor apparel and gear in the Northeast. While the companies enjoyed a steady period of growth and profitability, financial stability did not last.In 2016, Eastern Outfitters’ previous owner, Vestis Retail Group, shuttered regional sports retailer Sport Chalet in order to focus on the Bob’s and Eastern Mountain Sports operations. It ultimately sold those retailers to Versa Capital Management, which restructured the companies under the parent company Easter Outfitters LLC at the time.Fierce competition in the sporting goods space and private equity interest felled the company, which ultimately filed for bankruptcy after less than a year of Versa ownership. U.K. sports retailer Sports Direct emerged as a stalking horse bidder and in mid-April received the approval of the Delaware Bankruptcy Court to acquire certain assets of Eastern Outfitters LLC, including the businesses of Bob’s Stores and Eastern Mountain Sports for $101 million in cash, giving the British retailer a footprint in U.S. brick-and-mortar retail and a platform from which to grow U.S. online sales.Wet Seal has been flopping around on jagged rocks for well over a decade, its fate made slippery by the fickle predilections of its target demographic and the arrival of fast fashion. While its surf-and-sun aesthetic was once embraced by American teens in the early 2000’s, all that changed and between 2013-2015 the retailer lost more than $150 million and defaulted on $27 million in senior convertible notes. Nearly 340 stores were shuttered shortly thereafter in its first Chapter 11 filing in 2015. Through bankruptcy, the retailer was bought by private equity firm Versa for $7.5 million in cash.As logoed-T-shirts and mall hangouts fell out of fashion, Wet Seal failed to differentiate from similarly struggling rivals - Abercrombie & Fitch, Hollister and Aeropostale - and a turnaround stalled. Wet Seal was given a second life when it emerged as a private company with the aid of of Versa. But the private equity demands placed on the company led it into even deeper water, analysts told Retail Dive. Unable to find a buyer or draw in new capital, teen apparel retailer Wet Seal filed for bankruptcy protection again on Feb. 2.“This isn’t goodbye…” The Limited promised its customers as it shuttered some 250 remaining stores in January, just a few weeks before filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on Jan. 17. But without a physical presence, it was essentially goodbye for the women’s apparel retailer. It closed out 2016 as a shadow of its former self, beset by falling traffic and offering styles that can also be found at rivals like Loft and at department stores.As it publicly planned to restructure, the retailer was missing key top executives. CEO Diane Ellis left to become president of women’s apparel brand Chico’s in October after less than two months in that position. John Buell, who was elevated from his CFO role to interim CEO, abandoned ship in late December. Ironically, The Limited ultimately fell victim to the fast fashion philosophies it helped pioneer. “With Limited, one of the bigger challenges for them was the fast fashion industry and how quickly the fashion came into the marketplace,” Shelley Kohan, vice president of retail consulting at store analytics firm RetailNext, told Retail Dive. With a $26.8 million bid, private equity firm Sycamore Partners snapped up The Limited’s intellectual property, including its e-commerce business in late February, joining a portfolio that includes Belk department stores, Hot Topic, Nine West and Talbots.Get the free daily newsletter read by industry expertsThe free newsletter covering the top industry headlines
This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by
our Subscriber Agreement and by copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact
Dow Jones Reprints at 1-800-843-0008 or visit www.djreprints.com.
https://www.wsj.com/articles/macys-best-buy-sales-declines-reflect-shopper-pullback-on-discretionary-goods-3294ce3Listen to article(2 minutes)Consumers pulled back on purchases of apparel and electronics in recent months while continuing to spend on groceries and other necessities, according to some of the largest U.S. retailers.Macy’s Inc. and Best Buy Inc. said they expect sales to fall this year, after declining in 2022, as stubbornly high levels of inflation and other economic issues weigh on shoppers. Macy’s Chief Executive Jeff Gennette said he expects consumers to be in worse shape in 2023 than they were last year.47 mins agoLive Coverage1 hour ago47 mins agoLive Coverage1 hour ago21 mins ago1 hour ago5 hours ago9 hours ago10 hours ago7 hours agoContinue reading your article witha WSJ subscriptionAlready a member? Sign InWSJ MembershipCustomer ServiceTools & FeaturesAdsMoreDow Jones ProductsWSJ MembershipCustomer ServiceTools & FeaturesAdsMoreCopyright ©2023 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by
our Subscriber Agreement and by copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact
Dow Jones Reprints at 1-800-843-0008 or visit www.djreprints.com.
ProfileSectionstvFeaturedMore From NBCFollow NBC NewsBig retail chains face mountains of excess inventory as long-delayed orders of goods that were popular during the earlier days of the pandemic pour in, only to be met by consumers whose preferences and shopping habits have changed. Leisurewear and outdoor furniture have given way to airline tickets and restaurant meals as people catch up on experiences they put on hold during the coronavirus pandemic. To clear store shelves of unwanted stock, Target, Walmart, Macy’s and other retailers have been slashing prices on thousands of products in stores and offloading merchandise in bulk before it leaves the warehouse, often at substantial losses. But those losses could mean big gains for off-price retailers, including TJ Maxx, Marshalls and Ross, as more consumers, squeezed by high prices for gas, food and just about everything else, rein in their spending and turn to discounters for bargains.“I don’t think any retailer could have planned [for] this drastic sort of cliff and how it was going to happen,” said Brett Rose, the CEO of United National Consumer Suppliers, a wholesale distributor that buys discounted and overstock products from manufacturers and resells them to retailers.“[They] have all this product that came in that nobody’s buying.”Macy’s, Target, Walmart and other big retailers said inventory levels during the first quarter were up anywhere from 17% to 45% compared to the same time last year. “There’s probably 20% of [inventory] if you could just wish away and make it disappear, you would,” John Furner, the CEO and president of Walmart U.S., told analysts this month. Short of that, Walmart rolled back prices on more than 10,000 products, including kitchen appliances, sports equipment and home decor. Target and Best Buy also marked down more items to move products out of stores and distribution centers.With limited shelf and storage space and shipments of new goods arriving every other week, full-price retailers need to unload poor-selling merchandise quickly, said Lorraine Hutchinson, a retail analyst with Bank of America. “They don’t want the clearance to cannibalize the full-price sales of those fresh products,” she said. “They would rather take the hit, move it through a channel where it can’t be compared to their full-price items and do the best they can with the new fresh product that’s arriving.”That channel, or pipeline, often leads directly to off-price chains or to distributors like Rose, who resell surplus goods to stores that rely on closeouts, overstocks and out-of-season inventory to stock their shelves. Rose said the amount of merchandise on the overstock market is up by around 40% compared to June 2019 levels. And given the deep discounts and the wide array of goods available, brokers and off-price retailers are buying “more of more,” he said, and banking on growing demand for deals as shoppers look to stretch their buying power.  Burlington Stores CEO Michael O’Sullivan told analysts last month that the chain has been taking advantage of cheap closeout deals to pad inventories for late summer and fall, when he expects a surge in discount shoppers. “The buying environment now is better than it has been for years,” he said. “If [it] persists, then we would expect our assortment to be more compelling with even stronger values.” Still, the competition for consumers could get fierce, especially if the economy continues to slip. Data released Friday showed consumer sentiment in June dropped to a record low, according to the University of Michigan. And a recent survey by NPD Group, a global market research firm, found that 83% of U.S consumers plan to spend less on products over the next three to six months.  “The interesting thing about off-price retailers, it doesn’t feel like they have limitations,” said Ethan Chernofsky, the vice president of marketing with the retail-location analytics company Placer.ai. “They somehow managed to be value-oriented while still having an appeal to higher-income earners.”He said that according to Placer.ai’s research, about half of all shoppers at TJX, the parent company of Marshalls, TJ Maxx and HomeGoods, as well as Burlington and Ross, have household incomes of $50,000 or less. But as inflation continues to erode earnings and the threat of a recession grows, retail industry experts say, more consumers with higher household incomes could begin to trade down. “These fluctuations are typically good for business,” said Todd Stern, the CEO of XS Merchandise Inc., which specializes in closeout goods, including hardware, housewares and automotive products. He has been building up his inventory. Now he’s waiting anxiously for his customers to have an influx of new customers, so they will build theirs. “We’re an opportunistic company. That means whatever comes to us we buy,” he said. “But I think we have a challenge coming.” Even longtime discount shoppers are changing how they spend. Sharla Horton-Williams, an education consultant in Fort Worth, Texas, has shopped at discount and off-price stores for more than 20 years. But over the pandemic, she said, she switched up her route to save money. At TJ Maxx, where she does the majority of her shopping, she now sifts through clearance items first before she makes her way around the store.“I’m super excited to see more [clearance] red tags and yellow tags in Marshalls and TJ Maxx,” she said.She recently found a massage gun that sells for about $79 retail on clearance at the store for about $32 and a large five-wick candle for about $14; it sells for $20 retail.“If you’re putting stuff on sale, I don’t want to miss it,” she said.Big retailers, including Target, Macy’s and Bed Bath & Beyond, have said they expect that inventories and consumer demand will return to a more profitable balance by the end of the year or early 2023. Stern, who has been in the surplus goods business for more than 25 years, is reluctant to predict where his business will be in the next six months. “Sometimes, mistakes are made. However, we usually buy right,” he said. “My customers are deep discounters and rely on the bargain shopper. Can you tell me when the shopper will have disposable income? That’s my biggest concern.“I am a worrier,” he said. “What can I say?”CORRECTION (June 28, 2022, 12:20 p.m. ET): A previous version of this article misstated the name of a company. It is Burlington Stores, not Burlington Factory.Leticia Miranda is a business reporter for NBC News.© 2023 NBC UNIVERSALA warning from Nike (NKE) in its first-quarter earnings report has given us some serious insights into a handful of consumer stocks in the portfolio.We call them "readthroughs": valuable investment clues we find by sifting through financials and comments from other companies, including ones not owned by Jim Cramer's Charitable Trust, the portfolio we use for the Club. While it's a never-ending process, quarterly results and earnings calls are gold mines for these readthroughs.The biggest takeaway in Nike's quarter — and not just for us, but for Wall Street overall — is that the apparel giant has a major inventory problem in North America. Its shelves in the region swelled 65% in the first quarter compared with the same three-month window last year.Retail's inventory glut is a key reason why we started a position in TJX, the parent company of Marshalls and TJ Maxx, in late August. Apparel makers and sellers don't want to hold onto excess goods, especially when more seasonally relevant clothes are on their way. They want to get rid of it, even if it means taking the kind of short-term hit to profits that Nike said it's likely to experience.Off-price retailers such as TJX are the beneficiary of these industry dynamics. Here is the company in its own words, in its 2021 annual report:"With many retailers continuing to close stores and with congestion in the supply chain, we offer vendors an attractive solution for clearing inventory," TJX wrote, adding later that it is "in a great position to take advantage of the plentiful off-price buying opportunities in the marketplace."Nike is likely utilizing multiple approaches to get rid of its excess inventory, including markdowns in their own stores. However, Nike's quarter makes it clear the "plentiful off-price buying opportunities" that TJX Companies has seen have not disappeared yet.TJX shares were up more than 1.5% Friday, while Nike shares slumped more than 10%.Nike's negative China sales serve as a reminder about the current complexities of doing business in the world's second-largest economy.We had not forgotten about Beijing's attempts to enforce its so-called "zero Covid policy" and the economic problems associated with rolling lockdowns in major cities. Nevertheless, Nike's results are worth considering in the context of Club holdings Apple (AAPL) and Starbucks (SBUX), two other consumer-focused companies that count on China for growth.We recognize the types of products the three companies sell vary greatly. Still, we have to remember that just because lockdowns have been lifted, we're not out of the woods with business disruptions showing up in quarterly results. Not only are the results backward-looking — in Nike's case, they cover the three months ended Aug. 31 — but it will take time for things to normalize. Fortunately, our extended investment horizon allows us to be patient.On Nike's earnings call Thursday night, CEO John Donahoe compared China to inflation in that "we can't completely predict it."But structurally, we see some very encouraging signs with consumers," Donahoe said, adding that Nike's head of China operations, Angela Dong, is "very clear that they're seeing Chinese consumers are emerging from these lockdowns with a real hunger for innovation, quality, and energized storytelling."Donahoe's sentiment is similar to what we heard from Starbucks earlier this month during the company's investor day. China is a huge part of Starbucks' long-term vision — potentially overtaking the U.S. as its biggest market by 2025 — but it's not smooth sailing just yet."With a partial lifting of Covid restrictions in different cities, I am very pleased to report that our recovery in China is well underway," said Belinda Wong, chairwoman of Starbucks China. "However, given ongoing restrictions under China's dynamic zero-Covid policy and the unpredictability of the future outbreaks, we remain vigilant and our recovery path will continue to be nonlinear."For Apple, its China revenue declined 1% in the quarter ended June 25, with management saying the lockdowns took a bite out of demand. The launch of the iPhone 14 in the middle of this month could catalyze sales. Demand in China for high-end iPhone 14s appears "robust," UBS analysts said in a note Thursday, with wait times for Pro models longer than they were in 2021. "However, somewhat expected, the least expensive iPhone 14 is readily available in China," the firm said, meaning lower demand.The bottom line is that for companies like Nike, Starbucks and Apple, it's all about the reopening story in China. Investors understand its choppy, but further rationalization of pandemic policies will be good news for these companies. We saw it with Club holding Wynn Resorts (WYNN) as the gaming hub of Macao took steps toward welcoming tourists from mainland China again. Shares of Wynn, which has two properties in Macao, soared Monday in response to that news.We're not necessarily saying there's a similar binary-type event that would spark major one-day moves in SBUX or AAPL. However, investors want more clarity around the operating environment in China. As they gain confidence that Beijing is easing off "zero Covid" in a real way, we expect it to work its way into the stock prices of Starbucks, Apple and the like.(Jim Cramer's Charitable Trust is long TJX, COST and SBUX. See here for a full list of the stocks.)As a subscriber to the CNBC Investing Club with Jim Cramer, you will receive a trade alert before Jim makes a trade. Jim waits 45 minutes after sending a trade alert before buying or selling a stock in his charitable trust's portfolio. If Jim has talked about a stock on CNBC TV, he waits 72 hours after issuing the trade alert before executing the trade.THE ABOVE INVESTING CLUB INFORMATION IS SUBJECT TO OUR TERMS AND CONDITIONS AND PRIVACY POLICY, TOGETHER WITH OUR DISCLAIMER.  NO FIDUCIARY OBLIGATION OR DUTY EXISTS, OR IS CREATED, BY VIRTUE OF YOUR RECEIPT OF ANY INFORMATION PROVIDED IN CONNECTION WITH THE INVESTING CLUB.  NO SPECIFIC OUTCOME OR PROFIT IS GUARANTEED.Got a confidential news tip? We want to hear from you.Sign up for free newsletters and get more CNBC delivered to your inboxGet this delivered to your inbox, and more info about our products and services. © 2023 CNBC LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Division of NBCUniversalData is a real-time snapshot *Data is delayed at least 15 minutes. Global Business and Financial News, Stock Quotes, and Market Data and Analysis.Data also provided by ‘Tis the season for discounts and deal hunting.The off-price sector is poised to have a strong holiday season, according to experts, thanks to unusually high inventories across retail and a surge of deal-hungry consumers. However, holiday sales across the board are still expected to increase at slower pace than in 2021, Deloitte forecasted, reflecting an overall slowdown in the economy this year.“When consumerism took a huge cliff and dropped off, [demand] was pretty steady throughout the treasure hunt, off-price environment,” Brett Rose, CEO of United National Consumer Suppliers, told Footwear News in an interview. “Those high inventory levels being dumped back into the secondary market translate to driving prices down in the off-price segment, which alleviates a bit of the pressure from inflation.” 









Related




Ross Stores Inc. Is Opening 100 Stores in 2023: Here's Why







SaksOff5th.com Hires SVP of E-Commerce as Priorities Shift for 2023







Marshalls Stores Closing Locations List Includes Philadelphia & Minneapolis Due to 'Real Estate Strategies'




According to Rose, whose company distributes products to several off-price retailers, including Ross Stores and some TJX-owned stores, chains like TJX Companies, Ross, Five Below, Dollar Tree, Dollar General and Family Dollar have continued to see strong traffic throughout 2021 and 2022. Now, the discount sector will continue to benefit from its ability to offer deal hunters lower prices in a holiday season plagued by inflation.Rose added that an increase in “brand agnostic consumers” will also benefit the off-price sector, which typically offers off-brand versions of popular items like leggings and footwear.“There is a big shift to either store-brand are off-brand, because they realize, in many cases, it’s the same quality and a better value,” Rose said.According recent data from foot traffic analytics firm Placer.ai, visits to luxury and off-price retailers have outpaced the greater apparel retail category since the week of Aug. 8, though both categories were still down compared to last year. This data suggests that the gap between luxury and off-price shoppers is expected to widen this season, explained Placer.ai head of analytical research R. J. Hottovy in a report, with both of these categories seeing the bulk of the traffic.While the state of inventory and deal-hunting are tailwinds, the off-price sector will still have to compete with deep discounts across mainstream retail as well, as stores look to offload inventory in their own channels. For example, retailers like Target and Walmart have mentioned increasing markdowns in their stores to clear through excess inventory in categories like apparel. In many cases, these markdowns have been branded as early holiday or Black Friday deals.  








“Bargains won’t be confined to off-price, they will be pretty widespread across the whole retail sector, and this could take the edge away from off-price,” explained managing director of GlobalData Neil Saunders. For example, Macy’s said in Q2 that the holiday shopping season would commence in October and noted that it would increase markdowns across inventory as needed.At the same time, shoppers are more likely to aim for smaller basket sizes, even in off-price stores, to save money, Saunders said. Overall, almost one-third of U.S. consumers are planning to spend less this holiday season due to inflationary concerns, according to a recent Gartner survey. And 28% of consumers said they will be cutting spending as a result of brands raising prices due to inflation. So despite a desire for deals, consumers appear to be looking to save money where ever they can.“I expect the whole off-price segment to perform reasonably well over the holidays,” Saunders said. “However, this won’t be a boom year like 2021 — this will be a lot more subdued.” 










		Footwear News is a part of Penske Media Corporation. © 2023 Fairchild Publishing, LLC. All Rights Reserved.FN and Footwear News are registered trademarks of Fairchild Publishing, LLC. All rights reserved.
		

		Powered by
		
			WordPress.com VIP		
Access exclusive content
								By subscribing, I agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA Enterprise and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.							Footwear News is a part of Penske Media Corporation. © 2023 Fairchild Publishing, LLC. All Rights Reserved.Chip SomodevillaChip SomodevillaThe TJX Companies, Inc. (NYSE:TJX) is a leading off-price apparel and home fashions retailer in the United States and worldwide that operates over 4,500 stores in four major business segments: Marmaxx, which includes their T.J. Maxx and Marshalls chains; HomeGoods; TJX Canada; and TJX International.The company is an opportunistic purchaser of merchandise at prices that allow them to resell at 20% to 60% below full-price retail at still profitable levels. With inventory piling up at other traditional retailers, such as Walmart (WMT) and Target (TGT), the acquisition environment is especially attractive for TJX. With margins still below trend, the favorable buying environment provides an attractive opportunity for improvement.Additionally, with consumers increasingly stretched thin on higher prices in seemingly every category of goods and services, any discount they can get would come as welcome relief. And with the holidays right around the corner, Thanksgiving Day dinner is likely causing anxiety for many households. This could result in greater traffic into TJX's chain of stores for shoppers addressing their holiday wish lists following the Thanksgiving Day holiday.With earnings on deck, margins, inventory levels, and the state of the consumer are likely to be three top topics of interest among active investors. With shares already at the top-end of their trading range, there isn't much room for error. A miss coupled with negative commentary, especially surrounding inventory levels, could send shares tumbling. On the other hand, shares could also soar higher on hints of future outperformance, such as greater traffic levels and better-than-expected margins.At any rate, it's best to view TJX on a longer-term horizon. And with this view, the company is among the best retailers to include in a diversified portfolio. Its scale and leadership position sets it apart from their competition, and the value proposition of their goods provides a defensive hedge against broader market downturns. Together, this makes for a durable portfolio holding through any economic environment.Heading into their earnings release, TJX is one outlier among the broader S&P 500. At over $70/share, the stock is trading near the top-end of their 52-week range. And YTD, shares are little changed. This compares to a YTD decline of over 15% in the broader index. Comparably, the stock is also holding up better than similar off-price retailers, such as Ross Stores (ROST) and Burlington (BURL), who are down 14% and 50% YTD, respectively.Seeking Alpha - Total Returns Of TJX Compared To PeersSeeking Alpha - Total Returns Of TJX Compared To PeersIn prior releases, TJX has had a mixed record. While their earnings generally come in ahead of expectations, they have had a greater tendency to miss on revenue projections. Over the last three quarters, for example, they left over +$700M of expectations unfilled.Seeking Alpha - EPS And Revenue History Of TJX Compared to Consensus EstimatesSeeking Alpha - EPS And Revenue History Of TJX Compared to Consensus EstimatesFollowing the prior four releases, shares tracked lower initially, but always rebounded shortly thereafter. And currently, shares are back to the levels last seen at the beginning of 2022.YCharts - Recent Share Price History Of TJX Following Release Of EarningsYCharts - Recent Share Price History Of TJX Following Release Of EarningsIn Q3, sales are expected to be in the range of +$12.1B to +$12.3B, with a pretax margin of 10.1% to 10.4%, inclusive of higher incremental freight and wage expenses. This would be a notable improvement over pretax margins of 9.3% reported in Q2. That was down 150 basis points ("bps") from the same period last year. Margins would still be down from last year even if they came in within range in Q3 but by a lesser amount of between 60 and 90bps.In addition, margins in excess of 10% would also close the gap to ROST, who historically operated on higher margins than TJX, due to the lower margin structure of TJX's European and HomeGoods businesses, but has experienced a declining rate in recent periods as opposed to TJX, whose performance has strengthened on improving merchandise margin and effective expense management.YCharts - EBIT Margins Of TJX Compared To PeersYCharts - EBIT Margins Of TJX Compared To PeersQ3 earnings may also reflect even stronger merchandise margins resulting from the favorable buying environment created by the inventory woes of major retailers, such as TGT and WMT. TGT's second quarter earnings, for example, were down 90% from last year due in part to discounting and promotional activity on their excess inventory. Likewise, even after elevated levels of discounting, WMT noted that they still have about +$1.5B in inventory that they would like to sell.As a percentage of quarterly revenues, inventories are above 10-year averages at most major retailers. Macy's (M) has been one exception due to company-specific supply chain constraints that allowed them to clear out excess goods but have kept certain items in short supply. But between TGT and WMT, inventories are still tracking ahead of averages, even more so with TGT than WMT.YCharts - Inventory To Sales Ratio Of TJX Compared To Other RetailersYCharts - Inventory To Sales Ratio Of TJX Compared To Other RetailersAnd as a percentage of total quarterly assets, inventories are above averages everywhere, including at Macy's.YCharts - Inventories As A Percentage Of Quarterly Assets Of TJX Compared To Other RetailersYCharts - Inventories As A Percentage Of Quarterly Assets Of TJX Compared To Other RetailersElevated inventory among the various retailers is notable because, for an off-price retailer such as TJX, it creates a more favorable purchasing environment that was not available last year. Typically, TJX acquires their products through two primary means, via closeout inventory from local stores or directly from vendors and factories located primarily in Asia. Historically, the ratio is weighted significantly to closeout purchases, at about 75% of total purchases.But due to abnormally tight inventory levels last year, TJX was forced to source more of their merchandise from overseas, which is a lower-margin sourcing method compared to closeout inventory. Record freight costs only made it that much more expensive.This year, however, with the market flush with wholesale inventory, especially in Q2, TJX was in a prime position to capitalize on the favorable environment. Management recognized as much by noting in their Q2 conference calls the flood of opportunities available in the market.St. Louis Fed - Chart Of Merchant Wholesale InventoriesSt. Louis Fed - Chart Of Merchant Wholesale InventoriesThis doesn't necessarily imply that boom times are ahead for the company. After all, inventories are at elevated levels at TJX as well. In the prior quarter, inventories were up 39% from last year. Additionally, consumers have increasingly become more price sensitive as rising costs continue to eat away at personal savings rates. Granted, inflationary pressures are down from the record levels seen in June, but it remains elevated at 7.7%.For lower-income households, there are more pressing spending priorities, such as food and energy bills than treasure hunting at off-price retailers. This was reflected in September's retail report, which came in flat from the prior month. This, however, is likely to be more of an issue for ROST, who is more exposed to consumers on the lower end of the income spectrum.TJX, on the other hand, has a broad base of customers. So, while there may be some softness from certain customers, there may be an offset from those with more discretionary purchasing power. Recent sales trends at luxury outlets support the notion that those with the means are unlikely to scale back significantly, despite inflationary pressures. If anything, TJX is likely to see an increase in higher-income customers as they, themselves, increasingly seek out bargains to offset pressures elsewhere.Even though inventories are up, what's more important is the turnover of existing stock. In the most recent quarter, it took about 75 days to sell inventory. While this is up about five days over the last twelve months ending in the second quarter, it is on par with ROST and significantly better than many other retailers.Author's Calculations Of Cash Conversion Cycle Of TJX And Other Retailers Using Data Obtained From Quarterly Financial StatementsAuthor's Calculations Of Cash Conversion Cycle Of TJX And Other Retailers Using Data Obtained From Quarterly Financial StatementsAny further slowdown in the turnover rate, however, is likely to result in greater promotional and discounting activity, which may cut into margins in future periods. Over the last twelve months, there were some signs of this. Compared to the last fiscal year, for example, TJX experienced an increasing ratio in cost of goods sold ("COGS") and sales in conjunction with a declining turnover ratio for the last twelve months ending in the second quarter. This is indicative of a weakened demand environment marked with price reductions.Author's Analysis Of The Relationship Between The COGS/Sales And Inventory Turnover RatiosAuthor's Analysis Of The Relationship Between The COGS/Sales And Inventory Turnover RatiosTJX is a leading off-price retailer in apparel and home fashions with a market cap more than double that of their closest competitor, Ross Stores. Its global presence and adeptness in managing their supply chain, along with their top-grade relationships with their vendors are several competitive advantages that set it apart from other retailers.The company's business model is particularly advantageous in the current market environment, where value and bargains are forefront on the minds of consumers. Their exposure to consumers across the income spectrum also insulates them from concentration risks of being too dependent on more cash-strapped consumers, as in the case of Ross.Ahead of earnings, shares are trading at the top end of their 52-week range and are up nearly 14% over the past month. This is ahead of the broader market index and in line with Ross but significantly behind Burlington, which is up over 30% on the month.At just under 24x forward earnings, shares don't immediately appear to be a bargain. Additionally, at current levels, shares are trading at an intrinsic price point slightly above a target calculated in a prior analysis. Nevertheless, the company has extended upside due to its value appeal among customers hit hard by rising costs.With the holidays right around the corner, it wouldn't be surprising to see more consumers turn to TJX's chain of stores to fulfill their shopping needs. Inventory that would have likely been acquired at very favorable pricing would also translate to higher margins, which would appeal to larger institutional investors. For investors seeking a quality bargain retailer for their portfolios, TJX is a trusted name to be overweight on and one to be added on any price weakness.This article was written byDisclosure: I/we have no stock, option or similar derivative position in any of the companies mentioned, and no plans to initiate any such positions within the next 72 hours. I wrote this article myself, and it expresses my own opinions. I am not receiving compensation for it (other than from Seeking Alpha). I have no business relationship with any company whose stock is mentioned in this article.In this articleCheck out the companies making headlines before the bell:Lowe's (LOW) – Lowe's rose 1% in the premarket after it reported quarterly earnings of $4.67 per share, 9 cents above estimates. The home improvement retailer saw both revenue and comparable store sales come in below analyst forecasts but predicted full-year earnings would come in at the top end of its guidance range.Target (TGT) – Target fell 3.3% in premarket trading after the retailer reported quarterly earnings of 39 cents per share, well short of the 72-cent consensus estimate. Target's revenue matched estimates, but it cut prices significantly during the quarter to reduce excess inventory. Target said the 1.2% operating margin rate during the second quarter would improve to about 6% in the back half of the year.TJX (TJX) – The parent of the T.J. Maxx and Marshalls retail chains beat estimates by 3 cents with a quarterly profit of 69 cents per share, but revenue and comparable store sales came in less than expected. TJX cut its full-year forecast as well, saying inflation impacted the spending habits of its customers, and the stock fell 1.2% in the premarket.Krispy Kreme (DNUT) – Krispy Kreme tumbled 14.7% in premarket action after the doughnut chain reported lower-than-expected profit and revenue for the second quarter. Krispy Kreme said it is seeing significant deceleration in commodity costs in recent weeks.Manchester United (MANU) – Manchester United rose 4.6% in the premarket after Elon Musk tweeted that he was buying the British football team and then subsequently said he was joking.Bed Bath & Beyond (BBBY) – Bed Bath & Beyond surged 22.8% in the pre-market after registering over 20% gains in each of the past three sessions. The retailer's shares – which have been popular with "meme stock" investors, are up in 14 of the past 15 sessions, more than quadrupling in value over that stretch.Agilent Technologies (A) – Agilent rallied 6.6% in premarket trading after the life sciences and diagnostics company reported better-than-expected quarterly profit and revenue. Agilent also raised its full-year forecast on strong order flow.Southwest Gas (SWX) – Southwest Gas rose 4.7% in premarket action after investor Carl Icahn raised his stake in the utility company to 8.7% from 7.6%.Sanofi (SNY) – Sanofi shares slid 5.4% in premarket trading after the French drug maker halted development of breast cancer treatment amcenestrant. The halt came after a trial showed no signs that the drug was effective.Got a confidential news tip? We want to hear from you.Sign up for free newsletters and get more CNBC delivered to your inboxGet this delivered to your inbox, and more info about our products and services. © 2023 CNBC LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Division of NBCUniversalData is a real-time snapshot *Data is delayed at least 15 minutes. Global Business and Financial News, Stock Quotes, and Market Data and Analysis.Data also provided by Nov 16 (Reuters) - TJX Cos Inc (TJX.N) raised annual same-store sales forecast and beat quarterly profit estimates on Wednesday, as cash-strapped consumers turn to the discount store for affordable clothing and home decor items ahead of the crucial holiday season.Lower-income consumers, hit by decades-high inflation, have shown a preference for shopping at stores such as TJX that offer branded products at cheaper prices.Analysts have said that TJX is well-positioned to capture more consumer traffic than other retailers due to its value-positioning, especially with people refreshing their wardrobes as they return to work and attend social events.Retailer Target Corp (TGT.N), which forecast gloomy holiday-quarter sales on Wednesday as consumers cut back spending on discretionary items, said it expects to offer steeper holiday discounts to clear excess inventory.View 2 more stories Off-price retailers including TJX, which offers a compelling assortment of goods at reasonable prices compared to other brands and companies, will definitely benefit as consumers trade down, said Jessica Ramírez, analyst at Jane Hali and Associates.Separately, TJX named John Klinger as its new finance chief effective Jan. 29. Klinger succeeds Scott Goldenberg who has been the company's finance head since 2012.TJX third-quarter gross profit margin fell 0.4 percentage point to 29.1% from a year earlier, as it battles higher freight and labor costs due to lingering supply chain disruptions, the Russia-Ukraine war and surging inflation.The HomeGoods stores owner expects 2023 same-store sales to decrease 1% to 2%, compared to its earlier forecast of a 2% to 3% drop.It now sees full-year adjusted profit per share between $3.07 and $3.11, compared with its prior outlook of $3.05 to $3.13.Excluding items, TJX earned 86 cents per share in the third quarter, topping analysts' estimates of 80 cents, but sales missed estimates.Shares of the Framingham, Massachusetts-based company were up about 1%.Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles.The United Nations has purchased a large tanker to store about 1.1 million barrels of oil that will be transferred from a decaying vessel off Yemen's coast in a bid to avert an environmental disaster, officials said on Thursday.Reuters, the news and media division of Thomson Reuters, is the world’s largest multimedia news provider, reaching billions of people worldwide every day. Reuters provides business, financial, national and international news to professionals via desktop terminals, the world's media organizations, industry events and directly to consumers.Build the strongest argument relying on authoritative content, attorney-editor expertise, and industry defining technology.The most comprehensive solution to manage all your complex and ever-expanding tax and compliance needs.The industry leader for online information for tax, accounting and finance professionals. Access unmatched financial data, news and content in a highly-customised workflow experience on desktop, web and mobile. Browse an unrivalled portfolio of real-time and historical market data and insights from worldwide sources and experts.Screen for heightened risk individual and entities globally to help uncover hidden risks in business relationships and human networks.All quotes delayed a minimum of 15 minutes. See here for a complete list of exchanges and delays.© 2023 Reuters. All rights reservedThe inventory glut that dragged down U.S. retailers over the past two quarters may only be getting worse. For shoppers, that means better deals.Inventory levels have increased sequentially and are at the highest level relative to sales since the start of the pandemic, UBS Group AG analysts led by Jay Sole said in a recent note.Nike Inc. said Thursday that its North American inventories grew by a whopping 65% in the fiscal first quarter ended Aug. 31, well above the growth that set off alarm bells earlier this year at companies such as Walmart Inc., Target Corp. and Gap Inc.Americans have largely shifted their spending away from things like apparel and footwear in favor of travel and entertainment — leaving retailers with far more merchandise than they can sell at full price. At the same time, slower economic growth, inflation and higher interest rates are adding to concerns that consumers may slow their purchases in the second half of this year."The biggest variable impacting how quickly companies can clear excess inventory is consumer demand," the UBS analysts wrote on Sept. 21. "If consumer demand is weak, discounts will need to be steeper and this would result in more gross margin pressure."Nike said late deliveries and early holiday orders contributed to its inventory glut. Chief Financial Officer Matthew Friend said he expects the situation to have a "transitory impact on gross margins this fiscal year." The company will tighten its "inventory buys around the world based on some of the risks that could materialize in the second half," he said.Retailers use a number of strategies to offload excess stuff, including discounting or holding merchandise for another season. The problem with fashion merchandise specifically is that "it doesn't get better with age and the longer companies hold excess goods, the deeper the markdown they will eventually have to take on those items," the analysts at UBS said.Another option is to sell unwanted goods to off-price retailers like TJX Cos Inc. and Burlington Stores Inc."We're going to have some of the best branded content we've had in a while," TJX CFO Scott Goldenberg said on an August earnings call.Channel Control Merchants LLC, an inventory liquidation company that operates about 90 off-price stores throughout the U.S. southeast, has added an additional 25 retailer clients in the last eight months, said Chief Executive Officer Chris Homewood."We have seen more access to brands that we haven't in the past, there's higher-end inventory," Homewood said. "We're seeing access to inventory and brands that we traditionally had not seen before, and it's at a killer value."This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.https://www.barrons.com/articles/ross-tjx-stock-retailers-off-price-51668790350The pandemic was a windfall to nearly all retailers—except for off-price. There’s some hope, however, that that losing streak might finally be ending.The pandemic years were good for retail: Many Americans were flush with cash and had little in the way of entertainment options beyond shopping. However that dynamic largely didn’t extend to the off-price group, which includes TJ Maxx owner 
        

            TJX
          

       (TJX), 
        

            Ross Stores
          

       (ROST), and 
        

            Burlington Stores
          

       (BURL). Their highly successful treasure hunt business model thrives on in-person shopping, and snarled supply chains led to worries about their ability to stock merchandise.Already a member?
          
            Sign In
          
The pandemic was a windfall to nearly all retailers—except for off-price.An error has occurred, please try again later.Thank youThis article has been sent toCopyright ©2023 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights ReservedThis copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by our Subscriber Agreement and by copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact Dow Jones Reprints at 1-800-843-0008 or visit www.djreprints.com.
This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by
our Subscriber Agreement and by copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact
Dow Jones Reprints at 1-800-843-0008 or visit www.djreprints.com.
https://www.wsj.com/articles/retailers-holiday-discounts-are-steeper-this-year-cfos-say-11669158347Listen to article(2 minutes)Retail finance chiefs are entering the busiest shopping season of the year with declining profit margins as their companies offer more discounts to compete for sales and clear out excess stock. Profit margins in the sector have shrunk in recent months due to a mix of high inflation, excess inventory and growing expectations from consumers for price reductions. Among retailers in the S&P 500 that reported financial results through Nov. 22, the average margin on earnings before interest and taxes declined to 10.7% in the third quarter from 13.2% in the year-earlier period, according to S&P Global Market Intelligence. 47 mins agoLive Coverage1 hour ago47 mins agoLive Coverage1 hour ago21 mins ago1 hour ago5 hours ago9 hours ago10 hours ago7 hours agoContinue reading your article witha WSJ subscriptionAlready a member? Sign InWSJ MembershipCustomer ServiceTools & FeaturesAdsMoreDow Jones ProductsWSJ MembershipCustomer ServiceTools & FeaturesAdsMoreCopyright ©2023 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by
our Subscriber Agreement and by copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact
Dow Jones Reprints at 1-800-843-0008 or visit www.djreprints.com.
Got a confidential news tip? We want to hear from you.Sign up for free newsletters and get more CNBC delivered to your inboxGet this delivered to your inbox, and more info about our products and services. © 2023 CNBC LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Division of NBCUniversalData is a real-time snapshot *Data is delayed at least 15 minutes. Global Business and Financial News, Stock Quotes, and Market Data and Analysis.Data also provided by In this articleCNBC's Jim Cramer on Wednesday offered a list of off-price retailer stocks investors should have on their radar."There's an inventory glut in the traditional retailers and the big chains are desperate to get rid of this stuff so they can bring in new product," the "Mad Money" host said. "The off-price chains are the buyers of last resort."Here is his list of companies investors should be eyeing:Retail giants have reported earnings this week, with some faring better than others. Walmart beat on earnings and revenue in its second quarter results reported Tuesday. But the company reiterated its profit warning from last month, and CEO Doug McMillon cautioned in an interview Tuesday on "Squawk on the Street" that even wealthy consumers are becoming more frugal due to inflation.Target reported a wider-than-expected miss on earnings in its latest quarter on Wednesday and saw profit fall nearly 90% from the same period the year before. The company had warned in June that its plans to get rid of excess inventory would be a headwind to its bottom line.Cramer said that Target's dismal results reflect consumers' shift in appetite for experiences rather than goods, stemming largely from a desire to go out after staying inside during the height of the pandemic.While this change in consumer spending means there's a window to buy off-price retailers, investors should understand these stocks are long-term opportunities, he added."It doesn't mean that they're doing that great right now," he said.Click here to download Jim Cramer's Guide to Investing at no cost to help you build long-term wealth and invest smarter.Sign up now for the CNBC Investing Club to follow Jim Cramer's every move in the market.DisclaimerQuestions for Cramer? Call Cramer: 1-800-743-CNBCWant to take a deep dive into Cramer's world? Hit him up! Mad Money Twitter - Jim Cramer Twitter - Facebook - InstagramQuestions, comments, suggestions for the "Mad Money" website? madcap@cnbc.comGot a confidential news tip? We want to hear from you.Sign up for free newsletters and get more CNBC delivered to your inboxGet this delivered to your inbox, and more info about our products and services. © 2023 CNBC LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Division of NBCUniversalData is a real-time snapshot *Data is delayed at least 15 minutes. Global Business and Financial News, Stock Quotes, and Market Data and Analysis.Data also provided by One of the biggest challenges retailers are facing is an excess of inventory, brought on by a change in consumer spending habits as they grapple with historically high inflation and a slowing economy.Kohl’s Corp. 
        KSS,
        -2.99%
       Chief Executive Michelle Gass said Thursday, following a disappointing earnings report, that the department store chain has dealt with “difficult retail environments in the past.” She may be right, but recent economic data shows that the current inventory situation is unlike anything seen in 15 years.Also read: Here’s why Target was willing to pay so much to sell off excess inventory.This is depicted in the following chart of the ratio of retail inventories to sales for general merchandise stores through June, from the Federal Reserve Economic Database (FRED), using U.S. Census Bureau data.The chart shows inventories divided by monthly sales on a seasonally adjusted basis. The latest reading of 1.61 for June, which is the highest since April 2007, means it would take 1.6 months at the current sales rate to deplete inventory.This is likely what Target Corp. 
        TGT,
        -1.76%
       and Walmart Inc. 
        WMT,
        -0.67%
       were seeing when they warned earlier this year that profits would take a hit as they took quick and early action, such as cutting prices, to get rid of excess inventory. And note that those two retail giants saw inventory growth slow in the latest quarter, while some other retailers saw inventory growth accelerate.Here is what some of the retailers that have reported earnings in the past week are seeing in terms of inventory growth:Haraldur "Halli" Thorleifsson, from Reykjavík, Iceland, appealed to Musk over the weekend to determine his employment status.Tomi Kilgore is MarketWatch's deputy investing and corporate news editor and is based in New York. You can follow him on Twitter @TomiKilgore.Tomi Kilgore is MarketWatch's deputy investing and corporate news editor and is based in New York. You can follow him on Twitter @TomiKilgore.Visit a quote page and your recently viewed tickers will be displayed here.
This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by
our Subscriber Agreement and by copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact
Dow Jones Reprints at 1-800-843-0008 or visit www.djreprints.com.
https://www.wsj.com/articles/some-retailers-are-learning-to-love-bulked-up-inventories-11669841467Listen to article(1 minute)While many retailers are discounting, canceling orders and otherwise scrambling to get rid of a glut of goods filling their stores and warehouses, some are embracing their higher inventory levels. Merchants including Dick’s Sporting Goods Inc., Lowe’s Cos. and Walmart Inc. say the rising stocks signal a recovery from last year’s shortages driven by supply-chain disruptions and put them in a strong position to take advantage of consumer demand this holiday shopping period. 44 mins agoLive Coverage1 hour ago44 mins agoLive Coverage1 hour ago18 mins ago1 hour ago5 hours ago9 hours ago10 hours ago7 hours agoContinue reading your article witha WSJ subscriptionAlready a member? Sign InWSJ MembershipCustomer ServiceTools & FeaturesAdsMoreDow Jones ProductsWSJ MembershipCustomer ServiceTools & FeaturesAdsMoreCopyright ©2023 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by
our Subscriber Agreement and by copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact
Dow Jones Reprints at 1-800-843-0008 or visit www.djreprints.com.
Despite offering deep discounts, off-price retailers like TJX aren’t immune to the slowdown in consumer spending. During the second quarter of fiscal year 2023, TJX saw comp store sales drop by 5%. The company — which operates off-price retailers TJ Maxx, Marshalls and HomeGoods — had a drop in categories such as home decor and, to a lesser extent, apparel. The revenue decline is a major contrast to this time last year, in which post-vaccination era sales were up by 81.3% for TJX. Still, compared to the same period in 2019, revenue was up by 21.0% this past quarter. The company’s current figures, while stronger than pre-pandemic levels, showcase the challenges that even popular off-price retailers like TJX face as Americans battle inflation. “U.S. comp sales for the second quarter came in lighter than we expected as we believe historically high inflation impacted consumer discretionary spending,” TJX CEO and president Ernie Herrman said on the earning call. The softening of sales during the last quarter coincided with historic highs in gas and food prices, Herrman added. Net income for the quarter was  $809 million. John Tomlinson, the global director of research at M Science who covers off-price retailers, said TJX’s consumer spending comments seemed to contradict its previous performance. For instance, the group’s revenue was on the rise earlier this year, when food and essentials prices were already spiking. “The one area I do worry about is HomeGoods, where the results were pretty bad,” said Tomlinson. While many home and furniture brands are struggling to maintain their early pandemic sales, home improvement retailers like Home Depot and Lowe’s are still going strong. Home Depot, for example, reported on Tuesday that revenue was up 6.5% year-over-year.The big culprit for TJX’s traffic slowdown is discretionary spending moving toward other leisure activities, such as dining out and vacations. “There’s also a ton of travel this summer, so people likely weren’t out shopping as much,” he added.“We are excited about our many initiatives to drive customer traffic and sales for the fall and holiday selling season, and will be emphasizing our value leadership in our marketing,” Herrman said. He also noted that the company has had “zero pushback” on its price increases, a strategy it took up in the past year.However, there is an apparent bright spot for off-price stores in the coming months.The slew of excess inventory across the retail industry bodes good news for TJX, according to Herrman. With so many retailers offloading their merchandise, Herrman said there is “plenty of goods to go to everybody in the off-price world right now.” “We’re in a great inventory position,” he said on Wednesday’s call. This is especially important because in the fourth quarter, he explained, where name brands become more important for gift giving. “We expect to get some new vendors we didn’t even have last year.” Hermann noted that with gas prices dropping, the company’s topline is positioned to rebound in the next couple of months.Moving into the end of the year, retailers’ outlook will be tested as people begin to shop for the holidays during a potential recession. “We’ll get a better read on consumer spending in the next quarter,” said Tomlinson.Online fashion platforms continue to be squeezed by operational costs. A number of e-commerce startups, including Stitch Fix, ThredUp and The RealReal, reported quarterly losses this past week — with all of them promising to cut costs and reach profitability.
Online fashion platforms continue to be squeezed by operational costs. A number of e-commerce startups, including Stitch Fix, ThredUp and The RealReal, reported quarterly losses this past week — with all of them promising to cut costs and reach profitability.After months of cost-cutting, The RealReal is starting to inch closer to profitability. But its annual loss was still well into the nine figures, the company reported during its fourth quarter earnings call on Tuesday. After announcing layoffs and store closures, the luxury resale startup outlined the measures it’s taking to stop quarterly losses.
After months of cost-cutting, The RealReal is starting to inch closer to profitability. But its annual loss was still well into the nine figures, the company reported during its fourth quarter earnings call on Tuesday. After announcing layoffs and store closures, the luxury resale startup outlined the measures it’s taking to stop quarterly losses.Target has long used retail partnerships to expand its product assortment and differentiate itself from its competitors. But in a period plagued with an array of challenges including higher costs and inflation-weary shoppers, retail partnerships help Target gain more foot traffic and reach more customers. 
Target has long used retail partnerships to expand its product assortment and differentiate itself from its competitors. But in a period plagued with an array of challenges including higher costs and inflation-weary shoppers, retail partnerships help Target gain more foot traffic and reach more customers. Join now to gain access to exclusive content, unlimited articles and more. Visit your account page to modify or renew your subscription.Get Modern Retail's top stories every morning in your email inboxFollow @ModernRetail for the latest news, insider access to events and more.Please enable JS and disable any ad blockerJump to
Stores are closing and shoppers are cutting back on spending. TJ Maxx says its thriving because of this.In a call with investors last month – announcing its fourth-quarter and fiscal 2023 earnings – CEO Ernie Herrman said that the company is in an extremely strong position when it comes to sourcing inventory, describing the current inventory availability as "phenomenal."Recent store closures, and a slowdown in consumer spending because of inflation, have meant that many retailers are being left with a surplus of stock that they want to offload in a quick and discreet way, and TJ Maxx is often the perfect solution for this. The chain buys up excess inventory at a discounted rate and sells it to the consumer at bargain prices – typically 20% to 60% less than full-price retailers. It is an attractive place for retailers to offload inventory because TJ Maxx is happy to buy incomplete assortments, buys without asking for returns privileges, and mostly sells in-store so there's limited risk of discounted brand names being splashed all over the internet which could harm the brand image. So, how does it keep its prices so low?
                        
                      TJ Maxx has a team of more than 1,200 buyers who source products from its 21,000 vendors globally. These buyers are the "secret sauce" to its success, Neil Saunders, managing director of GlobalData Retail, told Insider. They know where to look for the best deals and cast their web wide.TJ Maxx's buyers know how to negotiate the best prices but they're also in a strong position to do so. Essentially, parent company TJX buys other companies' mistakes when they've ordered too much inventory or demand has tailed off, Simeon Siegel, managing director of BMO Capital told Insider. "Inventory doesn't get better with age," he said, and because retailers are aware of this, TJ Maxx pays much less upfront for this product. 2022 was a good example of how the market can turn in TJ Maxx's favor. While the company was subject to industry-wide rising supply chain costs, the snafus in this pipeline meant that many retailers were receiving the wrong inventory at the wrong time and an easy way to get rid of it was to sell to the off-price channel. TJ Maxx continues to have the "pick of a large pool" when it comes to inventory, Morningstar analyst Zain Akbar wrote in a note to clients in January.
The scale and size of TJ Maxx — it has vendors in over 100 countries and stores in nine — mean that its buying team is often buying product in bulk, which gives it more room to negotiate deals with sellers.According to Morningstar research, it also buys up inventory when it's cheaper to store up for future seasons. And as it's happy to buy a limited assortment rather than the full collection of sizes and styles from a retailer, it is an attractive option for these stores and therefore has more leverage to bargain on price. TJ Maxx also sells products that are manufactured especially for the chain, which means it has direct control over the pricing in this area. This is an area of its business that is growing, Siegel said. Well-known brands like Ralph Lauren have been known to make items for TJ Maxx in the past, but pulled back in a bid to address worries about brand exclusivity. TJ Maxx's low-frills stores also help to keep costs down. These stores are typically stuffed with racks of product. The appeal here is the treasure hunt shopping experience, where customers care more about assortment and price than the store design. 
                          Read next
                        

	
			Today's Digital Daily	
			


	
			Aéropostale Heading for the Metaverse	
			


	
			Today's Digital Daily	
			
CEO Ernie Herrman said the off-pricer is finding “phenomenal” availability of goods in the retail system.Deputy Managing Editor
	While fashion brands have reported mixed results for the fourth quarter so far and are tiptoeing into 2023, off-price giant The TJX Cos. Inc. is striding into the new year and eyeing market share gains. 
	Despite an unexpected shrink charge in the fourth quarter, the company seems to be settling naturally into the realities of the fashion market today, attracting shoppers who are wary of the economy and able to scoop up loads of excess goods in the retail marketplace. 
	Net profits for the quarter rose 10.4 percent to $1 billion, or 89 cents a diluted share, from $940 million, or 78 cents, a year earlier.




	
			Related Galleries	
	













	Fashion Trends
	



	
			They Are Wearing: Paris Fashion Week Fall 2023	
			













	Parties
	



	
			Best Dressed at the 2023 SAG Awards	
			







	However, merchandise margins did disappoint, decreasing slightly due to “an unplanned 0.6 percentage point shrink charge,” referring to the catchall accounting category that reflects the impact of shoplifting and other instances in which inventory goes astray. TJX had expected shrink to provide a 0.5 percentage point benefit to pretax profit margins and is now planning shrink to be flat.

	









	Sales for the three months ended Jan. 28 increased 4.8 percent to $14.5 billion from $13.9 billion. 
	While earnings were on-target with what analysts projected, sales came in about $400 million better than projections.
	The Marmaxx division, which includes the T.J. Maxx, Marshalls and Sierra stores and websites, saw comparable sales rise 7 percent, with strength in both apparel and accessories. The HomeGoods business, on the other hand, comped down 7 percent with tougher comparisons from a year ago.
	Ernie Herrman, chief executive officer and president of TJX, told analysts on a conference call that the “freshness” of the retailer’s merchandise mix was setting it apart. 
	“The first quarter is off to a strong start,” Herrman said. “We are excited about our plans to drive sales and customer traffic, and are laser-focused on initiatives to drive profitability this year and beyond.  Availability of quality-branded merchandise is phenomenal. We are in a great position to take advantage of the opportunities we are seeing in the marketplace.
	“Further, we are convinced our commitment to value and our treasure-hunt shopping experience will continue to serve us well in this environment,” the CEO said. “Importantly, we continue to see many opportunities to capture market share and improve profitability over both the short and long term.”
	Disruptions in the supply chain during the pandemic — and overly hopeful buying on the part of many retailers — has led to something of a bonanza of excess inventory that the off-pricer can choose from. 
	TJX has more than 1,200 buyers who buy from about 21,000 vendors. 
	“Our ability to buy goods across good, better and best categories gives us tremendous flexibility in the vendor marketplace,” Herrman said. 
	For the full year, TJX’s net profits increased 6.5 percent to $3.5 billion, or $2.97 a share, as sales rose 2.9 percent to $49.9 billion.
	This year, the company expects its comparable-store sales to be up 2 to 3 percent with earnings per share of $3.39 to $3.51.
	TJX has 4,835 stores across nine countries and Herrman said the company could open another 1,400 doors in its current markets. 

	









	“I am very confident in our plans to grow TJX into an increasingly profitable $60 billion-plus revenue company over the long term,” he said. 
	Investors also see potential in TJX — and analysts agree the company will continue to take share — but much of that has already been built into Wall Street’s assumptions. Shares of the company slipped 1.7 percent to $77.46 on Wednesday.Sign up for WWD news straight to your inbox every day

	
			Most Popular	
	
Get all the top news stories and alerts straight to your inbox.

	
			NYFW Fall 2023 Street Style Hair Trends: Unexpected Updos…	
			


	
			The 20 Best Slouchy Bags That Exude Laid-Back Style	
			


	
			NYFW Street Style Recap: The Fashion Crowd Goes Green	
			
Get all the top news stories and alerts straight to your inbox.

	
			Chris Rock Shreds Will Smith With Oscar Slap Jokes: 'Everybody Called Him a B---- And Who Does He Hit? Me'	
	


	
			Aldi Is Selling a Cordless Dyson Vacuum Alternative & Fans Can't Believe the Price	
	


	
			Chris Rock Slams Will Smith in Live Comedy Special for Netflix: "I'm Not a Victim, Baby"	
	


	
			$2 Billion Powerball Winner Buys Rakish Hollywood Hills Mansion	
	


	
			Newsletter Sign Up	
	
Send us a tip using our anonymous form.WWD and Women's Wear Daily are part of Penske Media Corporation. © 2023 Fairchild Publishing, LLC. All Rights Reserved.Get access to essential strategic content, in-depth reports, industry intelligence, and exclusive data.Get access to essential strategic content, in-depth reports, industry intelligence, and exclusive data.Get access to essential strategic content, in-depth reports, industry intelligence, and exclusive data.Get access to essential strategic content, in-depth reports, industry intelligence, and exclusive data.Sign Into Digital Commerce 360




 


Forgot your password?
Macy’s Inc. and Nordstrom Inc. both reported declines in online sales in 2022. Both retailers struggled with using promotions and discount pricing to offload excess inventory.Macy’s said digital sales were down 9% for the fourth quarter ended Jan. 28, 2022, though they were 24% higher than the comparable period in 2019. Brick-and-mortar store sales fared better, decreasing just 2% year over year. Macy’s is No. 16 in the 2022 Digital Commerce 360 Top 1000.Nordstrom’s ecommerce business felt similar pressures over the period. Digital sales for the fourth quarter ended Jan. 28 were down 13% year over year, and made up 40% of total sales for the quarter. Nordstrom is No. 20 in the 2022 Digital Commerce 360 Top 1000.Macy’s gross margin in the fourth quarter was 34.1%, down from 36.5% a year earlier. The company attributed the decline to markdowns and promotions that were larger than in 2021, a reflection of “the company’s commitment to end 2022 with inventories at the right level and composition.”“We were competitive but measured in our promotions, took strategic markdowns and intentionally did not chase unprofitable sales,” CEO Jeff Gennette said in the statement. The retailer is focused on areas of growth that include private brands, off-mall expansion and luxury goods, he added.Total same-store sales, a key performance metric for retailers, fell 2.7% in the fourth quarter. That figure was supported primarily by strong growth at Bloomingdale’s and Bluemercury, the New York-based company’s higher-end brands. At Macy’s namesake brand, meanwhile, they fell 3.3%.“We believe discretionary spend will be under pressure across income tiers and spending will move toward services and essential goods,” Gennette said on a call with analysts, noting that he expects demand for gift-giving and occasion-based products to remain strong.Like Macy’s, Nordstrom struggled with selling discounted merchandise.While discount rivals such as TJX Companies Inc.’s T.J. Maxx and Ross Stores Inc. (No. 70 in the 2022 Digital Commerce 360 Top 1000) have attracted more shoppers as inflation bites, Nordstrom’s off-price Rack business has floundered. Sales remain below pre-pandemic levels, a sign that Rack’s market share has been shrinking.Sales at Rack fell 8.1% in the quarter versus a 2.4% drop at the Nordstrom-banner stores. Still, executives told analysts on an earnings call that they plan to open 20 Rack stores starting in the spring because off-price consumers tend to prefer in-store shopping. Rack locations are less expensive to build than a full-fledged department store, executives added. Sales at U.S. department stores have been uneven in recent months, signaling a pullback by some shoppers amid stubbornly high inflation. Companies’ decisions to build up merchandise during the pandemic consumption boom have now left some store operators stuck with too much inventory, leading to profit-busting markdowns.Nordstrom says a reduction of merchandise and the winding down of its Canada operations will improve performance in 2023.Stay on top of the latest developments in the ecommerce industry. Sign up for a complimentary subscription to Digital Commerce 360 Retail News.Follow us on LinkedIn, Twitter and Facebook. Be the first to know when Digital Commerce 360 publishes news content.More on ThisIn This ArticleCompaniesIndustriesTopicsRelated Stories
Ryan Cohen builds Nordstrom stake, eyes board changes 
Macy's reports a 5% drop in Q2 online sales 
Snapshot: Macy's Inc. growth and online penetration 
Top apparel merchants see online sales growth dip 
						Copyright © 2022 Digital Commerce 360 | Vertical Web Media LLC					
				Copyright © 2022 Digital Commerce 360 | Vertical Web Media LLC			
                
                    
                        Let Retail Dive's free newsletter keep you informed, straight from your inbox.
                    
                
            Topics covered: retail tech, e-commerce, in-store operations, marketing, and more.Topics covered: brand launches, expansion opportunities, partnerships, startup trends, funding, and more.Topics covered:  Retail advertising, social media, analytics, personalization, search, video, and more.Topics covered: e-commerce, payment technology, IT, in-store tech, cyber security, and more.Topics covered: supply chain and logistics, sourcing, real estate, merchandising, and more.From Toys R Us to J.C. Penney, many retailers have filed over the past few years. Here’s who has fallen victim since 2017.Since 2017, Retail Dive has tracked major bankruptcies in the U.S. retail industry. Over the years, we’ve chronicled the long decline of once-dominant chains like Sears, and the unexpected and swift demise of others, like Lord & Taylor. Even in that short timeframe, some retailers have fallen victim to bankruptcy not once, but twice. In 2019 alone, both Gymboree and Payless filed for their second bankruptcies in two years. And in 2020, with many retailers facing shuttered stores and slow traffic, a record number of retailers — including many who had been teetering for years — filed. Some retailers that enter bankruptcy leave most of their stores behind, opting for a more digital-focused approach, while others are bought out by landlords and continue to operate large footprints. Some brands disappear entirely, while others seem to resurrect again and again. After Toys R Us’ swift liquidation in 2018, for example, the iconic toy brand is now sold at Macy’s.The state of bankruptcies says a lot about the health of the retail sector and the various categories it serves. Which retailers file in a given year provides clues about broader consumer trends and gives insight into the differences between retail’s winners and losers.Retail Dive will continue to update this tracker with the latest major retail bankruptcies. These entries provide information on when major retailers filed, the reasons behind the filing and what their plans were at the time.Keep up with the story. Subscribe to the Retail Dive free daily newsletterTuesday Morning filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in February. At the time of its filing, the Dallas-based company said it secured a $51.5 million debtor-in-possession commitment from Invictus Global Management to support the company’s operations during the case.As part of the reorganization, the company expects to shrink its store footprint by more than half, to 200 locations. Tuesday Morning had nearly 500 stores in 40 states last November and about 6,300 full- and part-time workers at that time. The company previously filed for bankruptcy in 2020. In its 2023 Chapter 11 filing, Tuesday Morning had liabilities and assets of between $100 million to $500 million. The parent company of Chuck & Don’s, Loyal Companion, Kriser’s and Natural Pawz, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in February.As part of the restructuring, the company plans to exit its Loyal Companion and Natural Pawz brands and shut down its existing stores on the East Coast, Texas and California. The company will continue to run under its Chuck & Don’s and Kriser’s brands. The retailer began liquidating 93 of its stores on Feb. 3.“This change allows us to create a stronger foundation for our team and our pet parent communities in our core go-forward brands and markets,” Independent Pet Partners wrote on LinkedIn.Party City Holdco in January filed for Chapter 11. It’s seeking a $150 million debtor-in-possession loan. A judge on Jan. 18 granted the company immediate access to $75 million of the loan.The pandemic tanked consumer demand for the company’s mainstay items – costumes, decorations and party favors – when people canceled in-person celebrations. In court documents, Party City said it has liabilities and assets of $1 billion to $10 billion and 10,001 to 25,000 creditors. The company says an “expedited restructuring” would reduce debt and improve liquidity.Party City has over 800 company-owned and franchised stores. The franchised stores, the company’s Anagram balloon business and subsidiaries outside the U.S. are not part of the bankruptcy case.Beauty accelerator Forma Brands – the owner of Morphe, Playa Beauty and more – filed for bankruptcy one week after announcing the closure of all U.S. Morphe retail locations. The filing included a proposed acquisition deal with lenders in which creditors would provide $33 million in funds to take over its wholesale operations, online platforms and international Morphe retail stores.In court documents, Forma revealed it has about $868 million of funded principal debt and interest obligations. The company noted that it began experiencing “liquidity and operational issues a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, widespread changes to consumers’ beauty habits and their need to terminate partnerships with certain influencers.”Sears Hometown Stores filed for bankruptcy in December in the middle of tussling with its parent, TransformCo, also known as “new Sears.” The home goods-focused chain, an offshoot of the once-iconic retail giant, has about 121 stores in 26 states and Puerto Rico, including locations run by independent dealers. That’s down from nearly 500 when “new Sears” reacquired it shortly after its own bankruptcy four years ago.Bankruptcy became necessary in part because Sears Hometown relies “substantially on TransformCo to provide key products and services,” including inventory, which TransformCo failed to provide, according to a bankruptcy court filing from Sears Hometown CEO Elissa Robertson. In 2019, former Sears CEO Eddie Lampert and his ESL financial firm stymied an effort to liquidate Sears Hometown, replacing two board members and changing its bylaws.Medly, founded in 2017, sells medical prescriptions online and through stores in seven states, calling itself the “nation's fastest-growing digital pharmacy.” About a year after expanding through its acquisition of Colorado-based pharmacy chain Pharmaca, Medly in December filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, stating in court documents that its “working capital has dissipated to the point where the Company will be unable to continue operations.” The company also said it “has contacted potential acquirers to discuss potential acquisitions.” In its filing, Medly lists assets and liabilities of between $100 million and $500 million each.What you need to know: Olympia Sports filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in September after starting a full store liquidation process over the summer. At the time of the filing, CEO Mark Coffey said the company chose to enter bankruptcy in order to retain employees and keep operations going as it wound down its footprint.The sporting goods chain, which was founded in 1975 in Portland, Maine, once operated over 230 stores, but ran just 35 stores when it filed. All of those stores were set to close by Sept. 30, 2022. Olympia Sports was acquired by private equity firm CriticalPoint Capital through its JackRabbit running specialist business in 2019.Iconic beauty company Revlon filed for Chapter 11, citing its burdensome capital structure, which includes over $3 billion in debt. It also pointed to struggles with its supply chain and inflation. Revlon CEO Debra Perelman, daughter of Ron Perelman, said that the filing would provide a “clearer path for our future growth” as it addresses its capital structure. “If executed effectively, Revlon could emerge from bankruptcy with a cleaner balance sheet and a better operating profile, improving longer term business prospects,” David Silverman, retail senior director with Fitch Ratings, said in emailed comments. With a past history of financial duress exacerbated by the pandemic, Escada America filed for bankruptcy in January with immediate plans to close five locations, or roughly half its footprint.The company, which is the U.S. retail arm of the Escada women's fashion brand, also blamed inflexible landlords for the need to file. Rather than litigate over leases, the company aims to shed stores and repay creditors while avoiding "a senseless and unnecessary liquidation."By 2010, some six years after its founding in 2004, Alex and Ani’s wire charm bracelets were a hit, steadily fueling sales for the following five years. But troubles began to brew in 2014, when top executives came and went at a rapid pace, disrupting the jewelry retailer’s momentum, according to court documents filed with the bankruptcy court of Delaware.Founder and ex-CEO Carolyn Rafaelian, who owned the company until 2012 when she sold a stake to private equity, has agreed to a resolution of her own legal claims against the company and part-owner Lion Capital, pending the bankruptcy court’s approval. Under the agreement, she would also sell her remaining 35% stake, per the court files.The retailer is swimming in about $127.4 million in outstanding funded debt obligations. The full effect of a 2019 out-of-court restructuring was stymied by a ransomware attack in February 2020 and then the pandemic. Alex and Ani already has a restructuring support agreement with its debt holders and equity sponsors for a financial and operational restructuring, which must be approved by the court, and is looking for a buyer. The retailer plans to keep operations going during the bankruptcy process, including stores “currently open;” about 25 remain closed due to COVID-19. Furthermore, the company says it will look to exit any leases deemed “uneconomic.”Founded in 2001, The Collected Group brought together three fashion brands: Joie (launched that same year), Equipment and Current/Elliott. Operational woes led to a change in private equity owners in 2018 after KKR converted its debt holdings to equity in an out-of-court restructuring. In the years following, the women’s fashion specialist invested in e-commerce and its wholesale channels, boosting profits. But the pandemic landed hard on fashion apparel and brick-and-mortar shopping. Even before filing for bankruptcy, The Collected Group decided to wind down its physical footprint, which included 33 stores at its largest. In filing for bankruptcy, The Collected Group aimed to reduce debt, complete its brick-and-mortar wind-down and restructure around its growing e-commerce business and wholesale.In early March 2020, Paper Source announced a major expansion after acquiring 30 prime store locations from a fallen rival, the stationery and paper goods specialist Papyrus, as that retailer wound down. Later that month, the world turned on its head as the COVID-19 pandemic sparked stay-at-home orders and mass temporary store closures, including all of Paper Source’s stores. The company had been healthy and growing before the public health crisis. But the sales decline for the year led to liquidity constraints as rent bills piled up. In March, the retailer filed for bankruptcy with a plan to close at least 11 stores and sell itself. On filing, it had a credit bid from current lenders to serve as a stalking horse in a proposed Chapter 11 auction of the company.Belk was among those retailers especially vulnerable when the COVID-19 crisis hit. Saddled with nearly $2 billion in debt, a legacy of a leveraged buyout, the southern department store chain’s liquidity fell by 70% last April. The retailer, while working toward a digital transformation, also is heavily dependent on store traffic; its sales fell 32% between March and December 2020. To buttress its finances, the company forged an agreement with lenders that allowed it to shed $450 million in debt, push out maturities, get new capital and let private equity sponsor Sycamore Partners retain majority ownership. The deal, according to the company, hinged on a lightning-quick trip through bankruptcy court. Belk aimed for 24 hours between filing and emerging, reaching out to creditor groups to gain their buy-in. A federal bankruptcy judge signed off on the deal, clearing the way for a speedy exit from Chapter 11 despite alarms raised by the U.S. trustee assigned to the case.With 66 retail stores, Solstice Sunglasses bills itself as the second-largest specialty retailer of sunglasses in the U.S., focusing on high-end brands like Dior, Gucci, Jimmy Choo, Kate Spade and Ray Ban. The luxury boutique said in a press release that it had been hit financially by the COVID-19 pandemic, with sales down more than 50% from 2019 and “limited relief to compensate for stores being closed and shoppers afraid or unable to shop.” The company filed for Chapter 11 in February with the aim of reorganizing and emerging from bankruptcy intact as a going concern. Solstice hired RCS Real Estate Advisors to evaluate its lease footprint but did not immediately say if or how many stores it planned to close. At the time of filing, Solstice CEO Mikey Rosenberg said in a statement that his team was “optimistic about reorganization as we continue to see increasing business in our stores as COVID restrictions are lifted and in the new fashions that our vendors are providing.”Like many retailers since the pandemic began, the U.S. arm of L’Occitane found itself with declining brick-and-mortar sales and expensive leases on the one hand, and rapidly growing online sales on the other. The managing director for the beauty brand’s North American region said that its lease obligations amount to $30.3 million annually across its 166-store footprint. With brick-and-mortar sales falling 56.5% year over year in the months between April and December, the burden of those costs ballooned very suddenly. The company, whose parent was founded in 1976 in Manosque, France, filed for Chapter 11 with immediate plans to close 23 stores and restructure around a smaller footprint and its digital business.Founded in 1956, women’s apparel seller Christopher & Banks specializes in value-priced women’s apparel and targets smaller markets with a pre-bankruptcy store footprint just shy of 450. The COVID-19 pandemic took a huge toll, decreasing demand among its core customer and adding stress to its finances. The company was facing eviction from some stores and, in January, defaulted on key loans and the lease on its headquarters. Christopher & Banks filed for Chapter 11 in mid-January with plans to close all of its stores and sell off its e-commerce business. An affiliate of Hilco Merchant Resources, and a lender to Christopher & Banks, emerged as a stalking horse bidder on its digital business.Created last year out of some of the parts of the liquidated Art Van Furniture, Loves Furniture immediately ran into problems. For one, it was without a permanent logistics hub, with another company picking up Art Van’s Michigan Warehouse. Loves contracted with a third-party logistics company, but said later that shipping issues left its stores less than ready when they opened. Issues getting orders to customers deepened the company’s problems, hurting its sales and, with them, its underlying financials. The logistics provider sued Loves after the retailer fell behind on its payments. It filed for bankruptcy in January in hopes of restructuring around a smaller footprint. In 2019, Francesca’s shook up its C-suite, hunted for a suitor, went on a cost-cutting mission and planned to shift to a fast-fashion model. Instead of working on a turnaround, however, the retailer spent much of 2020 issuing going concern warnings and permanently closing stores as the pandemic slammed its sales and roiled its plans.But the pandemic wasn’t it’s only problem. The retailer, which runs smaller-than-average stores, had been struggling for a while as apparel sales growth ebbed and fewer consumers shopped at malls. A day after its bankruptcy filing, the Nasdaq warned its stock would be delisted on Dec. 15 — something Francesca’s wouldn’t appeal since its investors are taking it private.TerraMar has committed to keeping at least 275 Francesca’s stores open, out of the 558 it was running at the time of its Chapter 11 filing after closing dozens in recent years.Founded in 1959 as a single store selling organs, Guitar Center eventually became the largest musical instrument retailer in the U.S., with more than 500 stores across its brands. After a private equity buyout, it struggled under its debt load throughout the 2010s.When the pandemic forced it to close its stores, Guitar Center ran into liquidity problems. After striking a deal with bondholders during the summer, the company forged an agreement with key lenders and equity holders to restructure the company’s debt and capital structure in Chapter 11.Founded in 1984, Furniture Factory Outlet ran nearly 70 stores in the Midwest and south central U.S. before the pandemic. As the year started, it was making progress on a turnaround, according to its CFO. But the pandemic forced it to lay off 95% of its staff and permanently shutter more than half its footprint amid the financial tumult. Its supply chain has also been upended by the pandemic, hurting its revenue and further constraining liquidity.Owned by private equity firm Sun Capital Partners, the retailer filed for bankruptcy in November with a $7 million bid to take it over from home goods retailer American Freight.Century 21 has been a favorite retailer for six decades, especially among New Yorkers. The company’s headquarters and downtown flagship were destroyed in the 9/11 terrorist attacks. When it was rebuilt at the site of the devastation, it stood as a symbol of the city’s endurance.The retailer was an early entrant in the off-price game, opening its doors in 1961 and selling high-end apparel for savvy fashionistas. While the likes of TJX Cos., Ross and Burlington have downplayed or avoided e-commerce in order to preserve their store-based treasure hunts and protect their margins, Century 21 ran a website to reach customers beyond the four states where it operates.Insurance payments helped the company recover from the destruction in New York 19 years ago, but some $175 million in claims related to the pandemic have been denied, forcing the retailer to close down, according to a statement last week from Century 21 co-CEO Raymond Gindi, a son of the founders.With support of its lenders through the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York, going-out-of-business sales have commenced at all stores in New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Florida and through its website, the company said last week in court documents.Stein Mart’s downward swing in fortunes over 2020 has been dramatic. After years of declining sales and negative profit, it opened the year with a takeover deal by a private equity firm and an entity controlled by its chairman. But the spread of COVID-19, and the ensuing turmoil in the retail industry and financial markets, threw a wrench into those plans. The deal was nixed, by mutual agreement.Not long after, Stein Mart added language to its regulatory filings acknowledging it might not be able to survive as a going concern as COVID-19 upended the industry. The retailer did see traffic increases after reopening its stores, and was able to land a $10 million loan from the federal government’s stimulus package.But events took another downward turn. COVID-19 surged in Texas, Florida and California, along with other states and areas in the U.S. Those three major states account for some 40% of Stein Mart’s stores and led to another crash in finances. Internal projections showed the retailer would soon run out of cash to operate its business.The retailer filed for Chapter 11 with dim hopes for a savior to come along to buy part or all of its business. Barring that outcome — which even the CEO acknowledges is unlikely given the retail market and past unsuccessful efforts to sell itself — Stein Mart is set to liquidate its stores and sell off any assets of value, including its intellectual property and e-commerce operations.The oldest department store in the U.S. last year was acquired by one of the newest e-retailers, an online apparel rental site, for $75 million. The tie-up was seen, warily by some, as promising for both — Lord & Taylor stores would provide Le Tote with the singular marketing that only brick and mortar can provide, while Le Tote would bring Lord & Taylor new, younger customers. The pandemic, and the temporary closures it forced onto nonessential retailers, ensured that the experiment wouldn’t be given a chance to work, however. Privately owned Le Tote in court documents said it notched about $253.5 million in revenue last year, but in April the company announced layoffs of most its workers at both its namesake company and at Lord & Taylor. The company employs 651, and arrived at bankruptcy court with funded debt obligations of about $137.9 million. The real estate arm of previous owner Hudson’s Bay Co. is its largest shareholder, with a 27.6% interest.Tailored Brands, which owns Men’s Wearhouse, Jos. A. Bank, Moores Clothing for Men and K&G, entered into a restructuring agreement supported by over 75% of its senior lenders. This was after months of warnings from the company that it might have to terminate operations or seek bankruptcy protection due to dramatic sales declines brought on by COVID-19. The retailer was struggling prior to the pandemic. Revenues had declined by 5.6% over the past two years, and the company pointed to the casualization of the American office and “the continuing decline in the brick-and-mortar retail industry generally” as primary pain points. As part of a go-forward plan, the company expects to reduce corporate staff, the number of retail locations, and its supply chain infrastructure.A few Ascena brands — tween label Justice and plus brands Lane Bryant and Catherines — along with the very idea of selling to any and all women at all stages of life, came from Les Wexner’s former L Brands empire. Wexner eventually abandoned them, and that vision. Ascena may be finding out why.The COVID-19 pandemic no doubt sped up Ascena’s restructuring — just a few months ago it denied a bankruptcy was in the cards. But it’s hard to pin its woes on that recent shock alone. Ascena’s original business, Dressbarn, never recovered after encountering headwinds years ago, its newer brands were already in trouble when they were acquired, and the multi-brand nature of the enterprise has been unwieldy for some time. The retailer will come out of the process much smaller. Its stable will shrink dramatically, with massive store closures expected (though not yet enumerated). That includes all locations of the Catherine’s plus-size banner, which is being sold to online plus retailer City Chic. With discount brands Dressbarn and Maurices already gone as of last year, the retailer therefore places its hope of a comeback on premium brands Ann Taylor and Loft and plus-size stalwart Lane Bryant. But the challenges it faced before the pandemic — notably the sales declines of those labels and of apparel sales growth more broadly — await.Founded in 1964 by Robert Anderson, The Paper Store has stayed in the Anderson family ever since and stayed close to its New England home. Now it is looking to sell itself after joining the ranks of other gift specialists to go bankrupt in recent years, including the parent of Papyrus as well as Things Remembered.The retailer — which sells stationery, jewelry, home decor as well as fashion, sports and other products — blamed its financial distress on everything from the calendar to weather to football to, of course, COVID-19. The Paper Store voluntarily closed its stores in March and kept them closed through key selling periods, including Easter and Mother’s Day. With unpaid rent and vendor payables mounting, the retailer wasn’t able to cut costs deeply enough to stay out of court, even after slashing its workforce down to a skeleton crew. In bankruptcy, the retailer hopes a buyer steps up for the company, and quick, to ensure its shelves are stocked ahead of the all-important holiday season. A restructuring adviser to the company said a group that includes one of The Paper Store’s creditors has expressed interest in making a stalking horse bid.RTW Retailwinds, owner of the New York & Co. banner along with Fashion to Figure, and Happy x Nature brands, was losing sales and closing stores well before the COVID-19 crisis began. But the pandemic put tremendous strain on the apparel seller’s finances and operations. With its stores closed and revenue in free fall, RTW went into default with landlords, vendors and its bank, Wells Fargo. In April, its CEO-elect resigned unexpectedly, shortly after being appointed, along with four of the company’s board directors. In June, the retailer said that a bankruptcy was “probable,” and later disclosed it may have to close all of its stores in a Chapter 11 scenario.When the company did file for Chapter 11 in July, it planned to close “a significant portion, if not all” of its physical stores. It also was evaluating a sale of the company’s e-commerce business and related intellectual property. Muji USA was formed in 2006 as a subsidiary of a Japan-based conglomerate that operates retail stores, campsites, cafes, hotels, model house builders and multiple other sectors, selling upwards of 7,000 products. The Muji brand was founded in Japan in 1980 as “an antithesis to the habits of consumer society at that time,” according to Muji USA’s chief restructuring officer, John Bittner, a senior managing director with Mackinac Partners. “On one hand, foreign-made luxury brands were gaining popularity within an economic environment of ever-rising prosperity,” Bittner said in court papers. “On the other hand, poor-quality, low-priced goods were appearing on the market and had a polarizing effect on consumption patterns.” Muji became a “critique” of this state of things, with the aim of selling “products that are useful for the customer and maintain an ideal of the proper balance between living and the objects that make it possible,” Bittner added.Minimalist stores, low prices and an array of products including home goods, beauty, apparel, food and more drew lines to some of Muji’s store openings in the U.S. A New York Times writer once called the retailer’s SoHo store “gloriously affordable.”By the end of 2019, the U.S. subsidiary had more than 20 stores, and it was in financial trouble after overexpanding and picking high-rent spaces in choice locations. At the end of the year, it had a negative cash balance of $26.5 million in its loan arrangement with its parent, according to Bittner. The COVID-19 pandemic would force the company to close all of its stores, deepening its woes. In bankruptcy, Bittner said the company aims to close some stores to rightsize its footprint, restructure its operations and grow its online presence. Muji USA plans to exit bankruptcy within six months.Brooks Brothers for the last nearly two decades has been run by Claudio Del Vecchio, who appreciates its 202-year-old history and its reputation for style and quality. But in that time, casual wear has become increasingly more acceptable for the white-collar professionals who are its customer base.The pandemic has tamped down demand further as people continue to work from home, interrupting a turnaround plan that has included seeking a buyer willing and able to provide the necessary resources. That’s still the plan, and analysts say the retailer should be able to easily find a new owner, thanks to brand strength that has endured for more than two centuries despite the upheaval in apparel sales. WHP Global, Authentic Brands Group and Simon Property Group — the latter recently retracted a lawsuit over unpaid rent — have all been named in press reports as potential suitors.Since its founding in Seattle’s Pike Place Market in 1972, Sur La Table has grown steadily. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, it had 126 stores along with a relatively robust e-commerce arm and fast-growing, revenue-generating cooking classes. But over the five years leading up to its bankruptcy, the kitchenware specialist suffered revenue declines and a churn of executives. The CEO who authored the company’s first day declaration was the company’s third since 2017. It also had capital expenses from installing commercial-level kitchens for its classes and debt leftover from a leveraged buyout. The pandemic crisis deepened Sur La Table’s troubles and brought threats and eviction proceedings from landlords. The company filed with a plan to close more than 50 stores and sell itself to what would be a third private equity owner in nearly 15 years, a deal that would keep the company, including a pared-down physical retail presence, intact.Founded in 1989, G-Star Raw credits itself with introducing “luxury denim for the streets.” Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, the company operated 31 stores in the U.S., with a flagship on Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills, California. Like scores of other retailers, G-Star had to close its stores when the pandemic hit the U.S., and has since determined to reduce its footprint to around seven stores (though that number could change if landlords are willing to swallow “significant concessions”), according to the company’s CEO. Along with the financial pain of the closures, G-Star’s stores suffered “looting during a period of civil unrest” in May and June. In bankruptcy, G-Star hopes to pare its footprint and emerge focused on its remaining profitable stores. The company has no secured debt, but rather a revolving credit account with its Netherlands-based parent.Lucky Brand was one of two denim specialists to file for bankruptcy in a single day in July. Founded in 1990, the brand and retailer eventually grew to have more than 100 stores and 98 outlets in North America. As the story goes with so many retailers, debt — leftover from a leveraged buyout years earlier — left the company burdened as challenges mounted on store retail and apparel in particular. The COVID-19 pandemic exacerbated those challenges. Executive Chairman Matthew Kaness said at the time of filing that the pandemic and its effects have “severely impacted sales across all channels,” and that business has not fully recovered yet. Liquidity strains from store closures related to the pandemic also disrupted the company’s ability to supply its stores with new inventory. Lucky Brand filed for Chapter 11 with plans to jettison about a dozen unprofitable stores and sell itself for at least $140 million. Going into bankruptcy it had a bid from licensing conglomerate Authentic Brands Group and one of the operating companies Authentic Brands works with.Founded in the middle of the Great Depression, the nutrition store chain that would become GNC is no stranger to economic calamity. But, after years of falling sales trying to trim its debt, the COVID-19 pandemic and economic disruption that came with it proved too much to manage outside of bankruptcy.GNC entered bankruptcy with plans to close up to 1,200 stores. It also had multiple parties willing to take it over. Key lenders agreed to a reorganization plan that would turn over ownership to them. On filing, GNC also had a $760 million offer, agreed to “in principle,” from its largest shareholder, the China-based Harbin Pharmaceutical Group. The alternate plans indicate that multiple parties see value in the retailer’s business and are willing to put up capital to save it.On a February conference call, executives at Tuesday Morning made no mention of financial distress or bankruptcy. The off-pricer had issues, to be sure. The company posted net losses for three years running and added only modest growth to its top line. But when the COVID-19 crisis hit in March, the retailer — much smaller than peers like TJX Cos and Ross Stores — watched as its sales went to nearly nothing after it closed its stores.The company called the pandemic disruption an “insurmountable financial hurdle” that forced it into bankruptcy. The company filed for Chapter 11 with hopes of reorganizing around a footprint about a third smaller than its roughly 700 or so stores. Yet Tuesday Morning did not have a negotiated plan with lenders going into bankruptcy court, leaving the ultimate outcome open-ended for now.Centric’s own brands include Hudson, Robert Graham, Swims, Zac Posen and Avirex. The company also licenses more than 100 well known labels, including Calvin Klein, Tommy Hilfiger, Nautica, Hudson Jeans and Under Armour in apparel; Kate Spade, Michael Kors, All Saints and Jessica Simpson in accessories; and Disney, Marvel, Nickelodeon and Warner Brothers in entertainment. With apparel sales growth down and department stores in decline in recent years, the apparel and accessories brands in particular were no doubt already under pressure when the COVID-19 disease broke out worldwide. CEO Jason Rabin said in a statement that the “pandemic disrupted many of our wholesale accounts’ ordering and constrained our cash flow” but also that the agreement forged with the company’s lenders ahead of its Chapter 11 filing positions it for long-term success.Centric will emerge from Chapter 11 as a private company. Debtor-in-possession financing of $435 million will allow it “to operate without interruption throughout the restructuring process,” according to a company press release.After years of trying to engineer a lasting turnaround with mounting losses and constant sales declines, bankruptcy speculation turned into bankruptcy reality for the 118-year-old retailer. Executives painted a picture of a company on the mend until the COVID-19 crisis hit, but J.C. Penney’s challenges were numerous, hefty and persistent well before the pandemic.Still, the pandemic hurt. According to the company’s CFO, sales in April were down 88% year over year and store sales approached zero as Penney closed its stores temporarily while the pandemic spread through the U.S. It also derailed talks with lenders that may have helped it manage its balance sheet outside of a court process.The retailer filed for Chapter 11 with support from key lenders for a plan. But even that pre-negotiated plan allows for multiple outcomes: re-organization with debt relief, a potential sale, or liquidation if the company can’t agree on a go-forward business plan with key lenders in July or if it can’t win third-party financing as it preps an exit. Even so, executives project optimism about the retailer’s future, saying Chapter 11 will allow it to make good on turnaround plans and unveiling plans to reduce Penney’s store footprint by nearly a third.After a booming third quarter, Stage Stores went into a financial tailspin shortly after the year started. Its holiday sales fell below expectations, perhaps by a lot. The missed targets led to a liquidity crunch, as well as layoffs, store closures and diminished plans for its conversion to an off-pricer.The owner of the Bealls, Palais Royal, Peebles, Stage and Goody’s department stores announced last year it would convert its remaining stores to its Gordmans model. That was based on encouraging data from stores it had already converted to Gordmans. But the holiday shortfall wrecked those plans. The company at one point considered a store footprint 200 stores smaller than what it planned as recently as the fall, sources told Retail Dive earlier this year.Stage Stores closed its stores this spring after the COVID-19 crisis hit, squeezing liquidity further and acting as the “proverbial ‘nail in the coffin,’” the company’s chief restructuring officer said later in court papers. Wells Fargo also reduced the retailer’s available borrowings under its revolver; meanwhile Stage Stores was hunting for new capital. But none materialized in time.The retailer filed for bankruptcy with plans to liquidate its business entirely, unless a buyer steps up by June to buy the company and keep it operating.The Canadian Aldo Group shoe seller runs 429 stores and has 3,300 employees in the U.S. The company’s vice president of finance, David Galarneau, called the U.S. “instrumental in the company’s climb to recognition,” with its first store opening in the country in 1993. But both the parent company and U.S. business have been in decline. Aldo U.S. posted a net loss of $52.8 million for the 12 months ending February. The company had a plan to turn around by paring its physical footprint in favor of e-commerce and replacing and buffering working capital with an asset-based lending structure.But the COVID-19 crisis derailed those efforts, forcing stores to close and bringing with it both sales declines and production delays in China. Galarneau said that without immediate financial help in bankruptcy, Aldo would be out of cash by the first week of June.In bankruptcy, Aldo hopes to restructure its debt and operations, including through store exits. The U.S. is such an important component of its turnaround effort that Galarneau said in court papers that the parent would not be able to survive if it cannot restructure Aldo U.S.’s debt obligations.Thanks to an albatross of debt from two rounds of private equity buyouts, it’s been difficult for Neiman Marcus Group to invest in innovations the way Nordstrom or even Macy’s have in recent years. The department store sector in general has been down in the dumps for years now, putting any player with extra burdens like that at particular disadvantage.Still, the century-old Dallas-based retailer has maintained fierce loyalty among some very high-spending customers. And, thanks to a virtual styling service that has helped stoke online sales, the retailer rakes in 30% of its sales from online, even before the COVID-19 pandemic hit. The Mytheresa business, however — the subject of much contention in recent years — isn’t part of the Chapter 11 process and “will continue to operate independently,” the company said.The company runs 67 stores across the U.S., including both department store names, so it isn’t over-stored like some rivals, according to one bankruptcy document. But one of its creditors would nevertheless like to shutter as many as 29 stores, as part of a proposed merger with Saks Fifth Avenue, another luxe department store, if one with a somewhat different clientele.The disease outbreak presents further challenges, including signs of weakness in luxury. After declining by about 25% in the first quarter, the global luxury market is expected to slow further, and could contract 20% to 35% this year, according to Bain and Co.Burdened with debt from a private equity buyout, preppy mainstay J. Crew was a bankruptcy risk for years before the COVID-19 crisis hit. Moreover, some observers say the apparel seller had made several style and quality missteps in its merchandising that hurt its brand.The pandemic appears to have been too much for the retailer to manage without help from a court, especially after the crisis derailed an IPO effort for Madewell, which could have provided much-needed debt relief. The company’s COO, Michael Nicholson, said that the company projected a $900 million decline in sales after closing its stores in March. “Though many companies across all industries faced hardships and tumultuous market conditions, [J. Crew was] uniquely and severely impacted as a customer-facing retailer in an already struggling industry,” Nicholson said.The company filed for Chapter 11 in early May with negotiated plans to convert around $1.7 billion in debt to an equity stake in the company, which would turn control over to lenders. J. Crew is also exploring its store footprint, which numbered about 500 stores at the time of filing. As part of J. Crew’s bankruptcy plan, the fast-growing Madewell brand will stay with the company.Last year, the bulk of Canadian outdoor apparel retailer Roots’ stores in the U.S. racked up a CA$6 million loss. The challenges only steepened with COVID-19 as Roots shuttered all of its North American stores.The parent company decided to pull the plug on Roots USA Corporation, putting it in Chapter 7 bankruptcy with plans to close seven stores in the U.S. That includes locations in Boston, Washington, D.C., Chicago, and a pop-up in New York.Roots hasn’t given up entirely on the U.S. market, though. The company said that it “believes a principally eCommerce-based distribution in the near-term is the best approach to continuing to serve its loyal U.S. customer base.” The Canadian parent also took ownership of two U.S. stores in Utah and Michigan with plans to keep them in operation. Those stores in particular “play important roles in the Company’s heritage and have well-established customer bases,” Roots said.Even before the spread of COVID-19 forced True Religion to close its 87 stores, the denim specialist’s sales were in decline and its profits were negative. After shuttering its footprint in response to the pandemic, 80% of its sales disappeared, according to the company. The retailer filed for Chapter 11 seeking new financing and court protection from its rent obligations for 60 days while its stores remained closed. The bankruptcy was True Religion’s second since 2017, when it filed in an effort to ease its balance sheet of debt left over from a private equity buyout. The company’s interim CFO said True Religion planned to open “many” of its stores “as soon as practical.”Founded in 1889, Modell’s spent the early months of 2020 trying to negotiate deals with landlords and vendors to stave off bankruptcy. The retailer hired RBC Capital Markets to pursue a sale of the sporting goods retailer in January, and while the firm reached out to 14 strategic buyers in recent weeks, and had a “potential bidder” for the company in hand, negotiations fell apart March 10, and a day later the retailer filed.In late February, the company announced it would have to close 19 stores unless it could “appropriately restructure the leases,” and CEO Mitchell Modell announced he would offer a minority stake in the business to an interested buyer. That didn’t happen, and the 19 closures turned into a chain-wide liquidation as Modell recognized it would provide “the greatest recovery for our creditors.”Modell’s pointed to a number of factors that influenced its path to bankruptcy, including the shift to e-commerce, competition from big-box and specialty players, and a series of unfortunate short-term events.Art Van Elslander opened the first Art Van location in Detroit in 1959 and eventually grew his business to be one of the leading furniture retailers in the Midwest. However, as competition grew in the space from both online retailers like Amazon and Wayfair, as well as from mass merchants, traditional furniture retailers like Art Van lost market share. Under “extreme market conditions and faced with limited liquidity,” the furniture retailer filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in Delaware.The founder sold his company to private equity firm Thomas H. Lee Partners in March 2017, and later that year Art Van Furniture acquired Pennsylvania-based companies Levin and Wolf.Aside from a going-concern sale of 44 stores and two distribution centers under its Levin and Wolf banners, the retailer — which also operates Art Van, Art Van PureSleep and Scott Shuptrine Interiors — will close all of its locations through going-out-of-business sales.Bluestem Brands’ direct-to-consumer business spans seven brands, two million customers, multiple categories, and various channels, including online, direct mail and telephone. Holdings include the Appleseed’s, Blair, Draper’s & Damon’s, Gettington, Fingerhut, Haband and Old Pueblo Traders brands.Ahead of bankruptcy, the company faced tightening trade terms with suppliers as it struggled financially. That was exacerbated when S&P Global downgraded the company, with analysts citing “our expectation that the company’s operating performance will remain weak amid continued pressures in the retail industry, and our view of liquidity as less than adequate.”The retailer’s liquidity was also hurt by high debt payments and a weak fourth quarter, a restructuring adviser said in court papers. It filed for bankruptcy with an agreement from Cerberus Business Finance for $125 million in debtor-in-possession financing. Cerberus was also a pre-bankruptcy lender and behind the entity BLST Acquisition Company, which has made a $300 million bid for Bluestem to keep it operating as a going concern, and which would set the baseline for an auction, if one is needed.Following nine consecutive quarters of sales declines, Pier 1 in February filed for bankruptcy. The home goods retailer in January announced plans to close up to 450 of its stores, and upon its filing, said it would close its Canadian operations entirely, which would leave it with about 540 locations in total.The company has commitments for approximately $256 million in debtor-in-possession financing from Bank of America, Wells Fargo National Association and Pathlight Capital to help fund it through bankruptcy. Pier 1 also set up a process to sell itself, in whole or in parts, to bidders in bankruptcy. Over the years, Pier 1 lost market share to competitors like Wayfair, TJX’s HomeGoods and mass merchants.After trying to negotiate with landlords for concessions, the parent of the Papyrus, Paper Destiny, American Greetings and Carlton Cards retail stores threw in the towel and opted to liquidate. Founded in 1950 by Marcel and Margrit Schurman, the Schurman group started out as an importer and wholesaler on the principle that there was a U.S. market for “greeting cards and stationery that intersected with the world of fine art,” a restructuring officer for the company said in court papers.But debt from a poorly-timed expansion — ahead of a major decline in mall traffic — as well as capital costs and financial tensions with a major supplier overpowered the retailer. After quietly initiating a full-scale liquidation, it entered Chapter 11 with plans to close its 200-plus stores.Founded in 1982 as a catalog retailer catering to professional women in need of maternity clothes, Destination Maternity became a leading player in a niche market. But declines in the U.S. birth rate and expanded competition, along with mall traffic declines, knocked nearly a third off the retailer’s top line. As it tried to turnaround, the company burned through five CEOs in as many years — each bringing his or her own strategy vision — and went through a bruising board fight. With liquidity drying up, the company put itself on the market this fall and found some interested parties. But Destination Maternity couldn’t find a savior in time to stave off a full financial meltdown. By October, finances were so tight the retailer stopped paying rent on all locations and held back vendor payments. In Chapter 11 now, it plans to continue marketing itself and is eyeing a December auction for the business. A bankruptcy filing for the fast-fashion retailer has been rumored for months, with the company reportedly hiring restructuring advisers in June. Some operations abroad, including in Mainland China, Taiwan and France, were shuttered even earlier. For years, Forever 21 was a fast-fashion juggernaut, doubling down on its cheap prices in 2014 with an even cheaper offshoot, churning out trendy looks that were here today, gone tomorrow.But the company appears to have missed out on two key trends. In an era when sustainability is gaining traction among apparel consumers, Forever 21 has done little to appeal to them. And it bet heavily on brick and mortar rather than e-commerce; The company first launched online in 2005, and now some 16% of its total sales come from there, according to court documents.The company has obtained $275 million in financing from existing lenders with JPMorgan Chase Bank as agent, plus $75 million in new capital from investment firm TPG Sixth Street Partners. But its troubles center around more than finances or channels, according to GlobalData Retail Managing Director Neil Saunders. “The long-term survival of Forever 21 relies on the chain creating a sustainable and differentiated brand,” he said in emailed comments. “This is something that will be very difficult to accomplish in a crowded and competitive sector.”Since April, Fred’s has been shuttering stores at an accelerated rate, with successive announcements totaling over 430 closures. That represented most of the Southern discount and drugstore retailer’s footprint.Fred’s had tried to turn itself around by focusing on higher-margin private label products, reducing SKUs, expanding its alcohol offering and tightening its budget. It has laid off hundreds of employees and sold major assets, including its specialty pharmacy business. But it wasn’t enough to stabilize its spiraling finances.Fred’s filed for Chapter 11 in September with plans to close all stores, liquidate its operations and sell off its remaining pharmacies (about 170 in all).Avenue Stores went into bankruptcy with a plan to wind down all of its remaining 222 stores and sell its e-commerce operation. The filing came after the company, unbeknownst to employees and customers, opted to wind down its physical footprint and held a quiet auction for liquidators to run the going-out-of-business sales. The plus-size women’s apparel retailer was formed more than 30 years ago from the spin-off of Limited Brands’ combined Lerner Woman and Sizes Unlimited units. After spinning off from Limited, it was acquired by Redcats USA, filed for bankruptcy in 2012 and then bought out of bankruptcy by private equity firm Versa Capital Management.Five profitable years followed. But new competition in the plus-size space from mass merchants and fashion stalwarts cut into sales while discounting, dwindling traffic, e-commerce and debt took their toll on the company. A little over one year after A’gaci exited its first Chapter 11, it found itself back in bankruptcy court again. However, this time around the retailer has the intention of closing all of its stores. The San Antonio-based retailer began going-out-of-business sales in early August shortly after filing under Chapter 11 in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Western District of Texas San Antonio Division.At the time of its filing, A’gaci said it expects the majority of store closings to be completed by Aug. 31. Just prior to the retailer filing, it shut down its e-commerce operations, and updated its return and exchange policies. This came as social media users buzzed about notices and locked doors at several of A’gaci’s physical store locations in Texas.In documents filed with the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York, Barneys revealed that all the stores closing have historically operated at a loss. Furthermore, the company has been short on cash and “operating without sufficient liquidity throughout the summer.” The retailer attempted to work with landlords to reduce rents on its properties, which it pointed to as one of the reasons behind its current financial troubles.The company also pointed to problems with sales performance from February to June this year, which decreased revenue by $34 million.Prior to filing Chapter 11, the company was attempting a sale. The retailer has until October to find a buyer or it may liquidate.A little over a year after exiting Chapter 11 on its first go around, Charming Charlie filed for bankruptcy again in July, this time with plans to wind down and close all 261 of its remaining stores.The retailer’s CFO said “onerous” leases, issues with inventory and vendors, and the continuing slowdown in brick-and-mortar retail left it unable to support its capital and cost structure.Founded in 2004 by Charles Chanaratsopon, the retailer made its name largely by its approach to merchandising, grouping products together by color and pricing them between department stores like Macy’s and teen retailers like Claire’s.Going out of business sales at the accessories and apparel retailer are expected to yield $30 million in revenue. At the time of filing, the company had 856 full-time and 2,486 part-time employees.Z Gallerie is a home decor retailer headquartered in Los Angeles with 76 stores nationwide, operating in a space that’s sitting in the midst of disruption. Subject to court approval, the business will have $28 million debtor-in-possession financing from secured lender KeyBank National Association.Outside of the announced 17 store closures, Z Gallerie is expected to keep physical locations and its website open and operational through the duration of bankruptcy processes, pending funding approval by the courts. Court documents state that the retailer estimates up to $500 million in assets.Diesel USA is a subsidiary of its parent company, Diesel S.p.A. Along with 28 stores, the business has wholesale partnerships with a variety of retailers including Nordstrom Rack, Saks Fifth Avenue and Amazon.com, among others.The company cited a number of factors that led to its bankruptcy filing, including a decrease in wholesale orders, a dramatic decline in net sales and instances of theft and fraud. Prior to filing the retailer attempted to renegotiate leases with landlords and will not pursue the renewal of leases on a number of underperforming locations. According to the filing, “closing certain expensive, long-term, and underperforming stores as well as obtaining relief from other burdensome executory contracts is crucial to its ability to continue operating.”Diesel USA has additional plans to revamp its e-commerce platform and grow wholesale operations.The discount shoe company spent last year closing down some 900 stores and cutting jobs at its headquarters after emerging from bankruptcy late in 2017. That plan was agreed to by lenders, which at that point largely owned the company. Without a buyer in sight, though, the business now is mostly disintegrating, and its wind-down has been swift so far. The retailer operates about 3,400 stores in more than 40 countries, a footprint that Stephen Marotta, appointed last month as the company’s chief restructuring officer, said in a statement contributed to its demise, and is closing a massive number of them — nearly half the store closures that Coresight Research recently estimated the U.S. would see this year.“We expect all stores to remain open until at least the end of March and the majority will remain open until May,” a spokesperson told Retail Dive in an email. “This process does not affect the Company’s franchise operations or its Latin American stores, which remain open for business as usual.”As Things Remembered prepped for bankruptcy, it was also apparently working out a deal that could preserve at least some of its retail operations and jobs — the company otherwise reportedly faced the closure of most of its 400 stores. The retailer announced the sale and the filing the same day.It was a close call for the 40-year-old retailer, which was acquired in 2012 by private equity firm Madison Dearborn from two other PE firms. Madison Dearborn exited that investment in 2017, the firm last month told Retail Dive in an email. Like many PE-backed retailers, Things Remembered, which last year attempted to boost sales through an Amazon storefront, is burdened with debt, which Reuters last month pegged at about $120 million. Leadership has also been upended more than once, as several top employees have come and gone in recent years, according to the LinkedIn pages of past executives.As a mall-based, teen apparel retailer owned by private equity (acquired by Advent International in 2009 in a $380 million take-private buyout), Charlotte Russe joins other embattled retailers hampered in a turnaround. Already under pressure to notch sales, the debt level creates a situation that “doesn’t work,” according to Greg Portell, lead partner in the global consumer and retail practice of strategy and management consulting firm A.T. Kearney.″[T]hese aren’t companies whose growth will outpace debt service,” he said in comments emailed to Retail Dive, adding that it’s a distraction from their basic task of retailing. “While it’s true that consumer preferences are changing, successful retailers are those that can adapt to those tastes and curate goods and experiences consumers value. Retailing is not an easy exercise. Beyond the financial aspect, it requires talented merchants, skilled store labor and an inspirational vision.”Even less hobbled retailers are struggling to keep up with disruption in the sector, but those like Charlotte Russe, distracted by their financial difficulties, including their real estate, are destined to fall even further behind. “Beyond the financial aspect, it requires talented merchants, skilled store labor and an inspirational vision,” Portell said. “Without those attributes, retailers will struggle. Without bold action, the retail landscape will continue to be scattered with bankruptcies.”Plus-size apparel retailer FullBeauty announced in early January that it was expecting to file Chapter 11. In a surprise move, the company filed and received approval on a restructuring plan in 24 hours. The company agreed to turn over control to its lenders and slashed $900 million in debt, according to court documents.In between filing and receiving approval for the restructuring plan, U.S. Trustee William Harrington filed an objection, stating that they company was rushing through the Chapter 11 too quickly. Those objections were overruled.After months of rumor and speculation, Gymboree filed its second bankruptcy in as many years in mid-January. Through the Chapter 11 process, the children’s retailer is shedding its unsuccessful brands, something a few analysts were surprised didn’t happen during the retailer’s last bankruptcy, and plans to sell the still-relevant Janie and Jack brand, as well as the IP and online platform for Gymboree. CEO Shaz Kahng noted in a statement that the retailer would be using the bankruptcy process to “preserve” the Janie and Jack brand, despite having to let go of both its namesake brand and the lower-priced Crazy 8 brand.In its second life, Gymboree faced intense pressure from rivals like The Children’s Place, as well as from big-box retailers like Target and even discount players like T.J. Maxx. The retailer also pointed to Gap as a direct competitor and noted that its secondary competitors are selling clothes “at increasingly cheaper prices.” Competition impacted the amount of traffic the retailer received, which led to discounting and slimmer profits, per court documents, and the consumer shift to online didn’t help either.Shopko is in the middle of an unfolding story about debt and assets. In December it was announced that the Midwestern retailer was closing 39 stores shortly after Debtwire revealed that the retailer was exploring restructuring. A few weeks later, pharmaceutical drug supplier McKesson Corporation filed a lawsuit alleging that Shopko owed the company $67 million after it “would not commit to any future date on which Shopko would be able to make payment,” according to court documents. By mid-January the retailer filed for Chapter 11, announced additional store closures and obtained $480 million in financing from lenders to continue business operations throughout the bankruptcy process. Walgreens then won 63 stores during an auction of the retailer’s pharmacy assets.The court documents originally filed by McKesson allege that the retailer, “ceased making payments to multiple other vendors,” and “has stopped paying numerous other creditors.” McKesson declined further comment on those allegations.Making and selling bedding has become a nightmare in the U.S. as disruptive material and sales innovations from bed-in-box startups like Casper continue to undermine traditional store-based mattress sales in the U.S. Innovative Mattress Solutions, which runs the Sleep Outfitters, Mattress Warehouse and Mattress King brands, is hardly alone: Ubiquitous retailer Mattress Firm is in the process of shuttering some 700 stores after filing Chapter 11 last fall.IMS has significantly fewer stores — all told its banners operate 142 specialty sleep retail locations, primarily in the southeastern U.S. — and last year contributed less than 2% of the Tempur Sealy’s global net sales. Still, Tempur Sealy CEO Scott Thompson earlier this month called the businesses retail footprint “overextended” and its capital structure “thin,” with neither “designed to effectively respond to the competitive pressures of the recent retail environment.”While legacy businesses in the market count sheep, the disruptors are busy counting sales. Leader Casper started off last year with plans to open its first standalone store and has expanded that to plans for 200 across North America after inking deals with Target and Nordstrom. Rivals Tuft & Needle, Leesa, Nest and Purple have partnered with legacy retailers and Amazon, which itself moved into the space last year with its own affordable and premium mattress options.The first weekend after the new year began, Beauty Brands filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, saying it had entered into an asset purchase agreement with Hilco Merchant Resources for the sale of its operating assets. At the time of the filing, the retailer owed $6.9 million on a secured loan and $11 million in unsecured debt to suppliers and landlords.Just before filing, the retailer had announced the closure of 25 stores, which it plans to liquidate through Chapter 11. The retailer plans to sell the remaining 33, though CEO Caryn Lerner noted at the time that all stores remained open and that the company’s objective was to “emerge from Chapter 11 in a stronger position and move forward as a successful brand.”Among other things, the company pointed to an unsuccessful brand repositioning attempt, which caused it to open 11 new format store locations between 2014 and 2016 and led to significant operating losses as those stores underperformed. The story comes at a time when many beauty retailers are performing well, and startups like Glossier and Birchbox are making ever more ambitious moves into the space.With over 65 years of experience, David’s Bridal was once a leader in the wedding apparel space. Now the retailer is struggling to keep up with a changing industry.The company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on Nov. 19 and announced a restructuring process that includes $60 million in secured financing and a $125 million asset-loan to keep stores open. In a video on the company’s website, CEO Scott Key assured customers that all 300 locations will continue operations and orders will be delivered as promised.Even though David’s Bridal claims to sell one-third of U.S. bridal dresses, the company has faced a steady increase in apparel competition. The casualization of weddings, positioning itself at a mid-range price point and the need to invest in larger digital capabilities has also dimmed the retailer’s effectiveness. “Bridal retail is a difficult segment,” said Raya Sokolyanska, VP senior analyst at Moody’s Corporation, in an interview with Retail Dive. “It was always a tough business to run, but is now tougher.”Sears has been bleeding money and customers for years. Its Chapter 11 filing, when it came, surprised no one, except perhaps by its timing. The company has beaten bankruptcy speculation in the past as former CEO Eddie Lampert (and majority owner) loaned the retailer hundreds of millions out of his hedge fund, ESL Investments. Lampert also kept Sears afloat through asset sales, store closures and thousands of layoffs meant to ease Sears’ bottom line.In 2018 alone, Sears borrowed millions from Lampert’s fund, ESL Investments, closed more than 200 stores, laid off hundreds of corporate employees, refinanced debt, cut a deal over its private label credit card that brought in millions and contemplated a sale of the Kenmore appliance brand and home services unit to Lampert and ESL.But, in the end, it wasn’t enough to keep Sears out of bankruptcy court. When it filed, Sears said it expected to close an additional 142 stores by the end of the year and reorganize around its remaining profitable stores (which numbered at about 400, according to the company’s chief financial officer) and sell them as a going concern. Meanwhile, Lampert’s ESL is in talks with the retailer about a bid for those stores.Mattress Firm (owned by Steinhoff International Holdings) filed for bankruptcy Oct. 5 with a plan to close 700 underperforming stores, 200 of which were slated to close just days after the company filed Chapter 11.In an increasingly competitive market, Mattress Firm had been facing challenges from e-commerce startups like Casper (which have won over customers with lower prices, convenient delivery and playful marketing), not to mention working through the loss of key supplier Tempur-Pedic, which stopped selling at Mattress Firm in 2017 after contract negotiations fell through, and filed a lawsuit in August claiming Mattress Firm was selling “confusingly similar” products to its own. The retailer was also carrying the weight of an 11.2% drop in revenue in fiscal 2017.Mattress Firm entered bankruptcy with a restructuring plan, under which the retailer hopes to shed unprofitable stores and improve its product offering. The company also released projections for profits of $200 million by fiscal 2020, assuming that 40% of the sales it’s losing from closed stores will be recaptured by nearby Mattress Firm locations.Founded in 1891 in San Francisco, Samuels Jewelers in August notched its fourth trip to Chapter 11 in just over 25 years. Now headquartered in Austin, Texas, the retailer runs more than 120 stores in the U.S. as well as an e-commerce site. A couple years after its most recent trip through Chapter 11, in the early 2000s, the jewelry seller was bought out by Indian company Gitanjali Gems, whose chairman has in recent years become the target of a criminal probe in India for allegedly defrauding multiple banks in the country, according to a bankruptcy filing.That was just the latest twist in a harrowing couple of years for Samuels, which has seen declining sales and widening operating losses (to the tune of $14.9 million for its most recent fiscal year). Ahead of filing for Chapter 11, the retailer won an agreement for bankruptcy financing as well as an agreement with liquidation firms Gordon Brothers and Hilco to sell excess inventory in order to pay off debt. Meanwhile, a representative for the company said in court papers that Samuels hopes to sell itself as an operating business during the court process.The owner of the Fallas chain of discount stores suffered financial setbacks from certain underperforming stores, exacerbated by severe weather in various regions, including by Hurricane Maria, resulting in what it called “prolonged, temporary closure of damaged stores and loss of revenue.” Before filing for Chapter 11, the company said it also suffered further financial losses from its acquisition of Conway Stores and from a data breach.CEO Michael Fallas said in a release after filing that the retailer was “historically a profitable company” and was committed to returning to profitability and financial help through the Chapter 11 process. “Our goal is to emerge a reorganized Company poised to compete in an evolving industry so that we can continue to serve the communities where we are rooted,” he added. The company also said it was working with creditors and vendors to hash out a reorganization plan in bankruptcy.Known for its oddball electronics, gifts, travel gear and other assorted doodads, Brookstone has faced the same foot-traffic problems as other mall chains. The company filed for Chapter 11 on Aug. 2 with plans to sell itself and close all 101 remaining mall-based stores in bankruptcy “following continued deterioration of traditional retail mall traffic.”As Brookstone winds down its mall presence, it plans to restructure around its 35 airport stores as well as its e-commerce and wholesale businesses. Brookstone CEO Piau Phang Foo said those three businesses are “operating successfully and should prove attractive to a buyer with the financial resources and vision to carry our company into the future.” To fund it through Chapter 11, Brookstone secured agreements to $30 million in bankruptcy financing from Wells Fargo and Gordon Brothers.Brookstone began as a direct marketer, placing its first advertisement for “hard-to-find-tools” in Popular Mechanics in 1965. After growing a catalog business, Brookstone opened its first brick-and-mortar store in New Hampshire in 1973. In 2014, the retailer was nearly sold in Chapter 11 to the parent of Spencer’s, a fellow seller of unique (and amusingly nonessential) wares. Instead, it went to a joint venture between the China-based firms Sailing Capital and Sanpower Group for $174 million.Since its founding in 1971, the comfort footwear brand Rockport Group has changed hands several times, moving from Reebok to Adidas to New Balance and Berkshire Partners,who in turn sold it to a group of the company’s lenders.After playing for decades in the bruising and competitive footwear space, the company went through a series of supply chain mishaps that wreaked havoc on its balance sheet and operations. Rockport filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy with a plan for private equity firm Charlesbank to take over ownership of Rockport’s global wholesale assets, e-commerce platform and retail operations in Asia and Europe. It would also have the option to take over the company’s North American retail operation and keep open stores it wanted, while using Chapter 11 to close unwanted stores.At the time of filing, Rockport operated eight full-price and 19 outlet stores in the U.S. and had $287 million in debt liabilities.The department store doldrums took their toll on Nine West. The company — which was founded in the 1970s by Jerome Fisher and Vince Camuto, who had the idea of manufacturing shoes on the cheap overseas and selling them in New York at lower prices — made 80% of its sales as a wholesaler. Unfortunately, Nine West made many of those sales to department stores, including Bon-Ton, Sears and Macy’s — one of which is bankrupt, another has been teetering on the edge of financial disaster for years and the other is in relatively healthy shape but still closing stores by the dozens.For years the women’s fashion retailer and wholesaler has been losing market share amid softening apparel sales and competition from e-commerce players. Nine West in 2016 got a reprieve from its lenders in order to help it ride out the holidays in preparation for 2017. Also that year, sources told Bloomberg that restructuring firms had approached Nine West with proposals to reduce its debt. In May last year, the company announced it had retained investment bank Lazard to evaluate a long-term capital structure solutionLast year, the brand’s customer loyalty started to waiver dangerously, according to data from mobile marketing platform inMarket emailed to Retail Dive. Except for a slight rebound in October, loyalty continued to decrease in the third quarter, and has edged down slightly each month, including during the holidays.Nine West entered Chapter 11 with $1.6 billion in debt and a $200 million stalking horse bid from Authentic Brands for its flagship and Bandolino brands. Creditors planned to take over the remaining business, including One Jeanswear, Kasper and Anne Klein apparel brands as well as Nine West’s jewelry business, all of which the company said were profitable and growing. Nine West’s CEO said at the time of filing that it had already removed inventory and vacated almost all of its remaining brick-and-mortar stores.Teen and tween-focused Claire’s Stores calls itself a “girl’s best friend,” with over 100 million ears pierced under its banner, but girls and young women have plenty other options these days. Among them are H&M, Forever 21 and Zara, as well as discount and online players.Trying to free up cash and stem losses, the company closed 166 storesin 2016, a year in which the company posted net income of $53.9 million compared to a net loss of $236.4 million in 2015. For 2017, the company said it expected EBITDA of $212 million, up nearly 13% from 2016 and sales of $1.3 billion, which is roughly flat from the year before.Even as the company showed positive cash flow, it said that much of its cash went to paying debt, making competing with fast fashion, discount and online that much harder. Like many retailers in trouble,private equity ownershipadded to Claire’s Stores’ woes. Apollo Global Management took Claire’s private in 2007 in a $3.1 billion leveraged buyout. The retailer had refinanced some debtto delay interest payments, but it wasn’t enough.The company filed for Chapter 11 March 19with a restructuring plan agreed to by a group of its largest lenders. Under the plan, Claire’s would reduce its overall indebtedness by $1.9 billion, the company said. The plan would also give current lenders a stake in the reorganized retailer through a new equity investment of $250 million. Claire’s said it expects to complete the Chapter 11 process by September and would exit with $150 million in liquidity.This is The Walking Company’s second trip to bankruptcy court in a decade. Founded in 1991, as a retailer of European “comfort shoes,” Walking Company — which includes the FootSmart and Big Dogs Sportswear banners — eventually expanded into malls across the country and broadened its focus to include more shoe types as well as clothing and lifestyle products. In 2008, it filed after a rapid store expansion ran into a massive recession. It emerged from Chapter 11 with its core business significantly improved, and then 10 years later ran into another sector downturn.Leading up to its 2018 filing, the company tried to renegotiate its store lease terms to lighten its rent burdens, but had only limited success in the effort. It also suffered when Wells Fargo significantly devalued the inventory that backed a major loan and when a key vendor stopped supplying its successful private label line.Walking Company entered bankruptcy in March with agreements for new investments and financing, and a clear path out of bankruptcy. Key to its future will be negotiations with landlords in Chapter 11 and, more importantly, making good on the new cash to adapt its model to keep up with customers and secular changes in retail.Bon-Ton Stores, with roots going back to the 19th century, is still tightly connected to its founding family. Once privately held and mainly debt-free, it went public and expanded over the past two decades. Today it has a debt load many see as unsustainable as its sales contract in a troubled department store sector.Bon-Ton entered 2017 under financial pressure, but many analysts thought the company had the liquidity to muddle through the year and into its next debt maturities in 2018. But as the bad news about the company flowed, the bankruptcy chatter grew louder. The retailer’s suppliers reportedly began pressing for tighter terms on shipments to the retailer last fall. In September, the retailer hired AlixPartners for help with its turnaround efforts and began a search for a financial adviser to help with a possible debt restructuring. In bankruptcy court, the retailer disclosed it had also gone looking for a prospective buyer starting in late 2017, but no formal interest materialized.In December, Bon-Ton failed to make a multimillion dollar interest payment, entering into a grace period that eventually lapsed as the company negotiated with its lenders. The retailer filed for Chapter 11 on Feb. 4 with agreements for more than $700 million in bankruptcy financing to keep the lights on. The company won court approval for the new financing soon after — over the objections from some bondholders calling for Bon-Ton to liquidate immediately in bankruptcy, calling the retailer’s prospects for survival in a shrinking department store sector “at best, uncertain, and in reality, unlikely.”The subsidiary of an international beauty retailer, Kiko USA played in a healthy and innovative beauty sector but had hitched its fortunes to malls.As mall traffic and brick-and-mortar sales declined, the makeup seller launched a new line of business selling through Amazon and using its “Fulfillment by Amazon” program. That business, together with Kiko’s own website, was growing in the double digits ahead of the company’s Chapter 11 filing. But physical sales shrank too fast for Kiko to adjust its cost base through lease negotiations. The company filed for bankruptcy protection in January with plans to close all but five of its domestic retail locations by the end of February.Kiko USA’s CEO said in a court filing that the retailer has a strategic plan that focuses on its offerings, remaining stores and e-commerce business.A’gaci’s recent physical expansion was particularly poorly timed — it came just as mall traffic started declining. After building out 21 new stores over the past two years, A’gaci is now looking to close 49 stores — almost 65% of its footprint — in bankruptcy.Along with bad timing, the women’s fashion retailer also suffered from bad luck. The company’s CEO said in a court filing that major hurricanes last year “ravaged” some of the retailer’s most profitable stores. The retailer’s earnings fell by $7.2 million in the past year, and the timing of the earnings hit was also terrible — it came as a major debt maturity loomed in 2018. The hurricanes, earnings hit, overexpansion and problems with a business software system roll out all worked together pushed the company to file for bankruptcy protection in January.Now the retailer, founded in 1971 and boasts, is looking to shrink its physical footprint and focus on its more profitable stores.Founded in 2004, Charming Charlie made a name for itself by organizing accessories and jewelry assortments by color and pricing its products in a “sweet spot” between more upscale retailers like Macy’s and specialty sellers like Claire’s that cater to younger shoppers. It grew into a retailer with more than $400 million in sales. Backed by private equity firms TSG Consumer Partners and Hancock Park Associates, the company has struggled of late to pay off its debt after a period of rapid expansion.Last year, the retailer reportedly explored a debt restructuring after it “failed to establish sufficient scale to compete in a highly fragmented market that has been tested by the rise of internet shopping and rapidly changing consumer tastes,” according to Reuters. The company’s outlook has fallen sharply since then. The retailer plans to shutter nearly one third of its 370 store fleet by the end of the year as it also cuts some corporate staff.The 20-year-old retailer based in Anaheim, CA has over 160 mall and outlet stores, according to the company’s website, but in early November, a lawyer representing Styles For Less told Reuters that some stores have already begun to shutter. It’s not yet clear how many more will need to close as the company restructures its mounting debt. It’s liabilities lie between $10 million and $50 million.Like other teen apparel chains that have found themselves in bankruptcy court this year, Styles for Less has suffered as mall traffic has declined and as logoed T-shirts have fallen out of style. One of the biggest problems ailing these retailers is a lack of differentiation from their competitors and a failure to promote a strong brand identity that aligns with Gen Z.Many saw the company’s mounting debt — a legacy of its acquisition by Kohlbergon Kravis Roberts, Bain Capital Partners and Vornado Realty Trust — as unsustainable, especially in a quickly evolving retail world and toy market. Toys R Us has been trying to compete against mass merchants, who have put pricing pressure on the box retailer, and online players. The company just this summer revamped its website, and it has been struggling for years with declining store sales.In a court document, CEO David Brandon said the company’s debt service payments have been gobbling up around $400 million in cash every year, making it impossible to keep up with modern competition in the toy retail market. If Toys R Us can emerge from bankruptcy with less debt and money to reinvest in its business, the process could mark a turning point.Aerosoles has been trying to find a sweet spot between its reputation for comfort and its appeal as a retailer of affordable footwear to include more fashion-forward options and higher prices. Denise Incandela, who has held executive roles at Saks Fifth Avenue and Ralph Lauren, replaced CEO R. Shawn Neville in April, and said that the Chapter 11 filing will enable the company to improve its financial structure and right-size its retail footprint, in order to refocus its turnaround strategy.Investment firm Palladin Retail Partners added Aerosoles to its stable of retail and apparel companies in 2014: The footwear company has had three chief executives since. With 120 retail locations, the brand had a performance vibe early on. The idea was to be able to walk from home to the subway and work without resorting to wearing one’s sneakers, but the brand’s appeal has faltered of late, and the tough apparel market has taken its toll.Vitamin World has closed 45 underperforming stores since early 2016, when it tapped RCS Real Estate Advisers to review its “above market rents.” That saved the company $2 million in profit, according to court documents. But it wasn’t enough to stave off bankruptcy and, as the retailer’s CEO previously told media, not all landlords would play ball as Vitamin World tried to negotiate rents and leases.Vitamin World Chief Financial Officer Frank Conley said in a court filing that the retailer also suffered “significant supply chain and ingredient availability issues” that hurt sales and crimped liquidity during the transition away from its previous owner, NBTY Inc., a supplement manufacturer. The company owes a total of $14.4 million in accrued interest on secured debt and another $9.5 million on a seller note originating from the company’s 2016 buyout by a private equity company. The retailer’s inventory is valued at around $30 million.Perfumania has been “working diligently to amend its business model, reduce its cost structure, improve supply chain efficiency, optimize marketing, reduce expenses and improve operating results long-term,” according to CEO Michael Katz. In the first quarter of this year, the company closed 43 stores, and its bankruptcy filing is meant to accelerate those efforts, Katz said. The retailer’s total debt, according to its bankruptcy filings, sits at $253.9 million. Meanwhile, sales have been declining — in fiscal 2016, they fell by 13.5% to $468.9 million compared to the prior-year period. Losses, too, have been widening, from 75 cents a share in 2015 to $1.53 a share last year. In its most recently reported quarter, Perfumania saw its amount of cash and cash equivalents fall by 76%.In Ch. 11, the company hopes to not just reduce its expenses but transform into more of a digital retailer, with an emphasis on its e-commerce business and omnichannel initiatives that will enhance and create a more seamless shopping experience.Alfred Angelo Piccione and Edythe Piccione founded the bridal business in Philadelphia in the 1930s and it was later run by their children and based out of Delray Beach, FL. The company recently held 61 stores nationwide, as well as stores in Japan, Spain, the Netherlands, France, the U.K., Canada and Australia. Many of its designs, which included “special occasion” dresses for bridesmaids and others, were sold by more than 1,400 retailers globally.On June 29, Alfred Angelo’s headquarters faced an eviction lawsuit over unpaid rent, according to the South Florida Business Journal, and on July 14 the company posted a notice on its website acknowledging it had filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy, which entails a full liquidation of its assets. Sudden store closures created chaos for patrons who had already ordered gowns and showed up at the shops to find them closed. “As a result, all stores and wholesalers are closed,” according to the company.Southern California retailer True Religion, founded in 2002, once held a respectable reputation for quality, designer denim. But as the athleisure trend took hold and consumer tastes shifted toward yoga pants over the last several years, the jeans maker struggled to retain its once popular business. By 2016, the company became burdened by some $500 million in debt and hired law firm Kirkland & Ellis LLP to explore restructuring options, according to Business of Fashion.Efforts to rejuvenate the business, however, have been fruitless. In February, Moody’s Investors Service pegged the brand as one at risk of filing for bankruptcy protection due to factors like stressed liquidity, weak quantitative credit profiles, challenged competitive positions, sponsor ownership and erratic management structure. The retailer ultimately filed for bankruptcy protection on July 5, signing a restructuring agreement with lenders to erase $350 million in debt, while keeping stores open and growing its digital business, True Religion CEO John Ermatinger, said in a statement.Papaya Clothing was in part a victim of its own success. After opening in 1999, the teen apparel retailer opened some 50 of the 80 stores it now operates during the past six years. From the chief financial officer’s account, Papaya was successful. It brings in about $134 million in sales, boasts a rapid product development timeline and consistently leads its category in sales per square foot of space. But it ran into the broader retail slowdown and faced heady competition from e-commerce, fast fashion off-price retailers. It filed for bankruptcy in June as it faced liquidity issues, in part due to the costs and debt from its rapid expansion.Like Gymboree and rue 21, Papaya hopes to remain in operation. Papaya has asked the court for the ability to exit some 30 leases. The retailer also asked for leeway to honor potentially hundreds of thousands of dollars in outstanding customer discounts, returns and loyalty rewards as it looks to restructure its debt and stay up to date on utility payments and other obligations.Children’s retailer Gymboree filed for Chapter 11 in June, after missing an interest payment on outstanding bonds and ahead of the maturity of loans worth hundreds of millions of dollars. The debt was a legacy of private equity firm Bain Capital’s leveraged buyout of the company in 2010. Adding to the company’s financial woes were suppliers —jittery about the company’s finances and news of then-CEO Mark Breitbard’s departure — demanding stricter payment and shipment terms.Gymboree’s sales had sagged amid declining mall traffic and competition from off-pricers, Target, e-commerce sellers and retailers in its own niche, namely The Children’s Place and Carter’s. Despite these headwinds and financial woes, Gymboree’s creditors see value in the company as a retailer. They’ve agreed to reduce the company’s debt load by $900 million and inject debtor-in-possession capital so Gymboree can keep operating. But the company will certainly shrink, with plans to shut as many as 450 stores in bankruptcy. Meanwhile, the company’s competitors are poised to snatch up any forgone sales as Gymboree closes stores. The main beneficiary is likely to be The Children’s Place, which overlaps broadly with Gymboree stores. Gymboree hopes to emerge from bankruptcy in a matter of months.In April, teen apparel retailer Rue21 began shuttering some 400 stores nationwide, about a third of its fleet, calling it a “difficult but necessary decision.” That left the retailer with about 800 stores and an e-commerce business. But downsizing wasn’t enough. Ultimately, the company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on May 15, entering into agreements with some lenders to reduce debt and provide additional capital in support of its restructuring efforts, with an aim to keep the company alive.Rue21 has been in the midst of a turnaround since an executive suite shake-up last October by private equity owner Apax Partners shortly after credit ratings firm Fitch Ratings warned Rue21 could slip down the slope to bankruptcy. The company replaced General Merchandise Manager Kim Reynolds as well as CEO Bob Fisch, who together had run the company for some 15 years. The retailer’s situation mirrors the challenges that have plagued many mall-based junior apparel retailers — over expansion, declining mall traffic and a lack of turnaround support from private equity ownership.Discount shoe retailer Payless filed for Chapter 11 April 4 that CEO W. Paul Jones called it a “difficult, but necessary, decision” prompted by a challenging retail environment, which he said will only intensify. The company immediately announced plans to close 400 stores as part of an effort to “work to aggressively manage the remaining real estate lease portfolio.” The store closure target doubled more than a month later, with 800 of the 4,400 stores Payless operated as of April. At the time of bankruptcy, Payless also agreed with a majority group of its term loan holders to reduce its debt load by almost 50% as well as its lower annual cash interest costs.Payless, founded in 1956 in Topeka, Kansas, reinvented shoe retail by introducing a no-frills, self-service approach that let it sell at lower prices. But the concept is no longer new and exciting to consumers, as the old-fashioned shoe salesperson is now relegated to department stores (and even Macy’s is phasing those out) and some specialty stores. Payless is also yet another victim of a leveraged buyout, after it was acquired in 2012 by private equity firms Blum Capital and Golden Gate.Gander Mountain filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on March 10 with immediate plans to close 30 stores and offer itself up on the auction block. The outdoor and sporting goods chain, like others that have fallen into bankruptcy this year, had gone through a rapid expansion in the years befor the retail slowdown. Since 2012 the company opened or announced some 60 new stores, and at one point operated 162 locations in 27 states. That was on top of its direct-to-consumer catalog internet business and the Overton’s e-commerce retail unit from Greenville, North Carolina. But the company, like Sports Authority and Eastern Outfitters before it, ran headlong into widening competition in its sector that includes the likes of Dick’s and Cabela’s.On May 1, Camping World Holdings, an Illinois-based network of RV-centric retail locations and outdoor-related services, announced it had won the bankruptcy auction for Gander Mountain and Overton. The sale topped $37 million and included a host of assets, among them real estate leases, intellectual property rights, operating systems and platforms, distribution center equipment, e-commerce businesses, and fixtures and equipment. Shortly after the court approved the sale, Camping World announced it would keep open 70 of Gander Mountain’s 126 then-remaining stores.Founded just over 100 years ago and once known as Richman Gordmans, Omaha, Nebraska-based Gordmans Stores was once a fixture in the Midwest. But the discount department store did not adapt well to changing consumer demand for e-commerce, only launching a website in 2015. Gordmans was purchased by private equity firm Sun Capital in 2008 and expanded its store fleet rapidly, mirroring the expansion of department stores like J.C. Penney and Macy’s at the time.In recent years, Gordman’s has been plagued by declining foot traffic and plummeting sales. Sales fell 75% in the past year alone, and in January, the company announced an unspecified number of job cuts amid “the current sluggish retail environment.” In March, the company ran 106 stores in 62 markets and 22 states and carried a debt load of about $85 million.That month, speculation of an imminent bankruptcy caught wind, and the retailer eventually filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection mid-March, also announcing a slew of job cuts. Just weeks later, ex-Gordmans CEO (and the founder’s great-grandson) Jeff Gordman challenged regional department store chain Stage Stores in a bid to regain control of his family company. Ultimately, Stage Stores won the rights to Gordmans intellectual property, about 50 store leases, a distribution center and inventory for an undisclosed amount.Once a star of niche retail and a veritable nerd mecca, the nearly 100-year-old company is now on its second bankruptcy and the regular butt of internet jokes about its sad liquidation sales. On March 8 RadioShack filed for Chapter 11, again, after having emerged from bankruptcy two years ago as a private company through a sale to hedge fund Standard General.With the March filing came plans to close 200 stores and to evaluate its options for the remaining 1,300. CEO Dene Rogers blamed poor performance of mobility sales for thwarting further progress for the retailer. RadioShack also failed to find any way to dent the increasing dominance of Amazon, which accounted for a whopping 90% of the $5.6 billion growth in U.S. consumer electronics in 2015, according to Deutsche Bank. At the time of the March bankruptcy announcement, RadioShack was reported to be in talks with Sprint, which helps run about a third of its brick-and-mortar operations in co-branded stores, to evaluate its options for stores.Aside from booksellers, electronics retailers were some of the most notable victims to be wiped out by Amazon’s e-commerce dominance. Amazon accounted for a whopping 90% of the $5.6 billion growth in consumer electronics sales posted nationwide in 2015, according to a note last year from Deutsche Bank analysts, and Hhgregg was unable to face down the competition.The electronics, home furnishings and appliance retailer, founded in Indiana in 1955, became a multi-regional chain in the late 20th century. As competition heated up in the space, from Amazon as well as Best Buy, Sears and J.C. Penney, CEO Robert Riesbeck took measures in 2016 to shake up the company’s senior management, expand its free delivery options, boost digital efforts and streamline the supply chain. On March 3 2017, the retailer announced a 40% reduction in its store fleet, some 88 underperforming stores and three distribution centers, resulting in 1,500 job cuts. News of the turnaround came amid reports of an imminent bankruptcy filing, which was ultimately filed three days later. At the time, Hhgregg said it had lined up an anonymous buyer (which appeared to be the retailer’s ad agency Zimmerman Advertising). But by the end of March, the company acknowledged the deal had collapsed. A month later, the retailer threw in the towel, receiving court approval for a plan to close its remaining 220 stores and liquidate its assets.BCBG Max Azria Group had been floundering for years leading up to its bankruptcy filing on March 1. The brand portfolio struggled to win a following and maintain sales while the company struggled under a debt load that by 2013 had risen to $685 million. Longtime investor Guggenheim Partners was responsible for $475 million of that. In 2015, BCBG received $135 million from investors to help restructure that debt, but problems persisted. In January 2017, the company hired business management consultant AlixPartners to tackle the challenge. By the beginning of New York Fashion Week in February 2017, BCBG, a 20-year veteran of the show, was making headlines for bankruptcy buzz rather than its clothing.On June 9 BCBG announced that two companies in a stalking horse bid — Marquee Brands and Global Brands Group Holding Ltd. — would buy for an undisclosed amount most of its assets in bankruptcy. Per the plan, Marquee would acquire the intellectual property of the flagship BCBG brand, and Global Brands would acquire assets associated with the operation of the BCBG business. Many saw the outcome as the most hopeful in the rash of recent retail bankruptcies, with the long-respected BCBG Max Azria brand kept alive by its buyers.Grand Forks, North Dakota-based Vanity was founded as a private company in the 1950s selling apparel and accessories for young women. By 2013, its store fleet had grown to 170 stores in 26 states. But the good times wouldn’t last.By March 2017, the mall-based specialty apparel retailer succumbed to declining foot traffic and changing consumer demands, and began advertising a “going out of business” sale. That month it filed to reorganize under bankruptcy protection with a plan to shutter all of its stores. While a restructure is still pending, its e-commerce website is currently disabled although it promises shoppers, “We’ll be back soon!” Whether it will, remains to be seen.Eastern Mountain Sports, founded in 1967 in Massachusetts by two climbers, and Connecticut-based discount retailer Bob’s Stores were once popular sellers of outdoor apparel and gear in the Northeast. While the companies enjoyed a steady period of growth and profitability, financial stability did not last.In 2016, Eastern Outfitters’ previous owner, Vestis Retail Group, shuttered regional sports retailer Sport Chalet in order to focus on the Bob’s and Eastern Mountain Sports operations. It ultimately sold those retailers to Versa Capital Management, which restructured the companies under the parent company Easter Outfitters LLC at the time.Fierce competition in the sporting goods space and private equity interest felled the company, which ultimately filed for bankruptcy after less than a year of Versa ownership. U.K. sports retailer Sports Direct emerged as a stalking horse bidder and in mid-April received the approval of the Delaware Bankruptcy Court to acquire certain assets of Eastern Outfitters LLC, including the businesses of Bob’s Stores and Eastern Mountain Sports for $101 million in cash, giving the British retailer a footprint in U.S. brick-and-mortar retail and a platform from which to grow U.S. online sales.Wet Seal has been flopping around on jagged rocks for well over a decade, its fate made slippery by the fickle predilections of its target demographic and the arrival of fast fashion. While its surf-and-sun aesthetic was once embraced by American teens in the early 2000’s, all that changed and between 2013-2015 the retailer lost more than $150 million and defaulted on $27 million in senior convertible notes. Nearly 340 stores were shuttered shortly thereafter in its first Chapter 11 filing in 2015. Through bankruptcy, the retailer was bought by private equity firm Versa for $7.5 million in cash.As logoed-T-shirts and mall hangouts fell out of fashion, Wet Seal failed to differentiate from similarly struggling rivals - Abercrombie & Fitch, Hollister and Aeropostale - and a turnaround stalled. Wet Seal was given a second life when it emerged as a private company with the aid of of Versa. But the private equity demands placed on the company led it into even deeper water, analysts told Retail Dive. Unable to find a buyer or draw in new capital, teen apparel retailer Wet Seal filed for bankruptcy protection again on Feb. 2.“This isn’t goodbye…” The Limited promised its customers as it shuttered some 250 remaining stores in January, just a few weeks before filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on Jan. 17. But without a physical presence, it was essentially goodbye for the women’s apparel retailer. It closed out 2016 as a shadow of its former self, beset by falling traffic and offering styles that can also be found at rivals like Loft and at department stores.As it publicly planned to restructure, the retailer was missing key top executives. CEO Diane Ellis left to become president of women’s apparel brand Chico’s in October after less than two months in that position. John Buell, who was elevated from his CFO role to interim CEO, abandoned ship in late December. Ironically, The Limited ultimately fell victim to the fast fashion philosophies it helped pioneer. “With Limited, one of the bigger challenges for them was the fast fashion industry and how quickly the fashion came into the marketplace,” Shelley Kohan, vice president of retail consulting at store analytics firm RetailNext, told Retail Dive. With a $26.8 million bid, private equity firm Sycamore Partners snapped up The Limited’s intellectual property, including its e-commerce business in late February, joining a portfolio that includes Belk department stores, Hot Topic, Nine West and Talbots.Get the free daily newsletter read by industry expertsThe free newsletter covering the top industry headlines
This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by
our Subscriber Agreement and by copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact
Dow Jones Reprints at 1-800-843-0008 or visit www.djreprints.com.
https://www.wsj.com/articles/macys-best-buy-sales-declines-reflect-shopper-pullback-on-discretionary-goods-3294ce3Listen to article(2 minutes)Consumers pulled back on purchases of apparel and electronics in recent months while continuing to spend on groceries and other necessities, according to some of the largest U.S. retailers.Macy’s Inc. and Best Buy Inc. said they expect sales to fall this year, after declining in 2022, as stubbornly high levels of inflation and other economic issues weigh on shoppers. Macy’s Chief Executive Jeff Gennette said he expects consumers to be in worse shape in 2023 than they were last year.51 mins agoLive Coverage1 hour ago51 mins agoLive Coverage1 hour ago25 mins ago1 hour ago5 hours ago9 hours ago10 hours ago7 hours agoContinue reading your article witha WSJ subscriptionAlready a member? Sign InWSJ MembershipCustomer ServiceTools & FeaturesAdsMoreDow Jones ProductsWSJ MembershipCustomer ServiceTools & FeaturesAdsMoreCopyright ©2023 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by
our Subscriber Agreement and by copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact
Dow Jones Reprints at 1-800-843-0008 or visit www.djreprints.com.
ProfileSectionstvFeaturedMore From NBCFollow NBC NewsBig retail chains face mountains of excess inventory as long-delayed orders of goods that were popular during the earlier days of the pandemic pour in, only to be met by consumers whose preferences and shopping habits have changed. Leisurewear and outdoor furniture have given way to airline tickets and restaurant meals as people catch up on experiences they put on hold during the coronavirus pandemic. To clear store shelves of unwanted stock, Target, Walmart, Macy’s and other retailers have been slashing prices on thousands of products in stores and offloading merchandise in bulk before it leaves the warehouse, often at substantial losses. But those losses could mean big gains for off-price retailers, including TJ Maxx, Marshalls and Ross, as more consumers, squeezed by high prices for gas, food and just about everything else, rein in their spending and turn to discounters for bargains.“I don’t think any retailer could have planned [for] this drastic sort of cliff and how it was going to happen,” said Brett Rose, the CEO of United National Consumer Suppliers, a wholesale distributor that buys discounted and overstock products from manufacturers and resells them to retailers.“[They] have all this product that came in that nobody’s buying.”Macy’s, Target, Walmart and other big retailers said inventory levels during the first quarter were up anywhere from 17% to 45% compared to the same time last year. “There’s probably 20% of [inventory] if you could just wish away and make it disappear, you would,” John Furner, the CEO and president of Walmart U.S., told analysts this month. Short of that, Walmart rolled back prices on more than 10,000 products, including kitchen appliances, sports equipment and home decor. Target and Best Buy also marked down more items to move products out of stores and distribution centers.With limited shelf and storage space and shipments of new goods arriving every other week, full-price retailers need to unload poor-selling merchandise quickly, said Lorraine Hutchinson, a retail analyst with Bank of America. “They don’t want the clearance to cannibalize the full-price sales of those fresh products,” she said. “They would rather take the hit, move it through a channel where it can’t be compared to their full-price items and do the best they can with the new fresh product that’s arriving.”That channel, or pipeline, often leads directly to off-price chains or to distributors like Rose, who resell surplus goods to stores that rely on closeouts, overstocks and out-of-season inventory to stock their shelves. Rose said the amount of merchandise on the overstock market is up by around 40% compared to June 2019 levels. And given the deep discounts and the wide array of goods available, brokers and off-price retailers are buying “more of more,” he said, and banking on growing demand for deals as shoppers look to stretch their buying power.  Burlington Stores CEO Michael O’Sullivan told analysts last month that the chain has been taking advantage of cheap closeout deals to pad inventories for late summer and fall, when he expects a surge in discount shoppers. “The buying environment now is better than it has been for years,” he said. “If [it] persists, then we would expect our assortment to be more compelling with even stronger values.” Still, the competition for consumers could get fierce, especially if the economy continues to slip. Data released Friday showed consumer sentiment in June dropped to a record low, according to the University of Michigan. And a recent survey by NPD Group, a global market research firm, found that 83% of U.S consumers plan to spend less on products over the next three to six months.  “The interesting thing about off-price retailers, it doesn’t feel like they have limitations,” said Ethan Chernofsky, the vice president of marketing with the retail-location analytics company Placer.ai. “They somehow managed to be value-oriented while still having an appeal to higher-income earners.”He said that according to Placer.ai’s research, about half of all shoppers at TJX, the parent company of Marshalls, TJ Maxx and HomeGoods, as well as Burlington and Ross, have household incomes of $50,000 or less. But as inflation continues to erode earnings and the threat of a recession grows, retail industry experts say, more consumers with higher household incomes could begin to trade down. “These fluctuations are typically good for business,” said Todd Stern, the CEO of XS Merchandise Inc., which specializes in closeout goods, including hardware, housewares and automotive products. He has been building up his inventory. Now he’s waiting anxiously for his customers to have an influx of new customers, so they will build theirs. “We’re an opportunistic company. That means whatever comes to us we buy,” he said. “But I think we have a challenge coming.” Even longtime discount shoppers are changing how they spend. Sharla Horton-Williams, an education consultant in Fort Worth, Texas, has shopped at discount and off-price stores for more than 20 years. But over the pandemic, she said, she switched up her route to save money. At TJ Maxx, where she does the majority of her shopping, she now sifts through clearance items first before she makes her way around the store.“I’m super excited to see more [clearance] red tags and yellow tags in Marshalls and TJ Maxx,” she said.She recently found a massage gun that sells for about $79 retail on clearance at the store for about $32 and a large five-wick candle for about $14; it sells for $20 retail.“If you’re putting stuff on sale, I don’t want to miss it,” she said.Big retailers, including Target, Macy’s and Bed Bath & Beyond, have said they expect that inventories and consumer demand will return to a more profitable balance by the end of the year or early 2023. Stern, who has been in the surplus goods business for more than 25 years, is reluctant to predict where his business will be in the next six months. “Sometimes, mistakes are made. However, we usually buy right,” he said. “My customers are deep discounters and rely on the bargain shopper. Can you tell me when the shopper will have disposable income? That’s my biggest concern.“I am a worrier,” he said. “What can I say?”CORRECTION (June 28, 2022, 12:20 p.m. ET): A previous version of this article misstated the name of a company. It is Burlington Stores, not Burlington Factory.Leticia Miranda is a business reporter for NBC News.© 2023 NBC UNIVERSALA warning from Nike (NKE) in its first-quarter earnings report has given us some serious insights into a handful of consumer stocks in the portfolio.We call them "readthroughs": valuable investment clues we find by sifting through financials and comments from other companies, including ones not owned by Jim Cramer's Charitable Trust, the portfolio we use for the Club. While it's a never-ending process, quarterly results and earnings calls are gold mines for these readthroughs.The biggest takeaway in Nike's quarter — and not just for us, but for Wall Street overall — is that the apparel giant has a major inventory problem in North America. Its shelves in the region swelled 65% in the first quarter compared with the same three-month window last year.Retail's inventory glut is a key reason why we started a position in TJX, the parent company of Marshalls and TJ Maxx, in late August. Apparel makers and sellers don't want to hold onto excess goods, especially when more seasonally relevant clothes are on their way. They want to get rid of it, even if it means taking the kind of short-term hit to profits that Nike said it's likely to experience.Off-price retailers such as TJX are the beneficiary of these industry dynamics. Here is the company in its own words, in its 2021 annual report:"With many retailers continuing to close stores and with congestion in the supply chain, we offer vendors an attractive solution for clearing inventory," TJX wrote, adding later that it is "in a great position to take advantage of the plentiful off-price buying opportunities in the marketplace."Nike is likely utilizing multiple approaches to get rid of its excess inventory, including markdowns in their own stores. However, Nike's quarter makes it clear the "plentiful off-price buying opportunities" that TJX Companies has seen have not disappeared yet.TJX shares were up more than 1.5% Friday, while Nike shares slumped more than 10%.Nike's negative China sales serve as a reminder about the current complexities of doing business in the world's second-largest economy.We had not forgotten about Beijing's attempts to enforce its so-called "zero Covid policy" and the economic problems associated with rolling lockdowns in major cities. Nevertheless, Nike's results are worth considering in the context of Club holdings Apple (AAPL) and Starbucks (SBUX), two other consumer-focused companies that count on China for growth.We recognize the types of products the three companies sell vary greatly. Still, we have to remember that just because lockdowns have been lifted, we're not out of the woods with business disruptions showing up in quarterly results. Not only are the results backward-looking — in Nike's case, they cover the three months ended Aug. 31 — but it will take time for things to normalize. Fortunately, our extended investment horizon allows us to be patient.On Nike's earnings call Thursday night, CEO John Donahoe compared China to inflation in that "we can't completely predict it."But structurally, we see some very encouraging signs with consumers," Donahoe said, adding that Nike's head of China operations, Angela Dong, is "very clear that they're seeing Chinese consumers are emerging from these lockdowns with a real hunger for innovation, quality, and energized storytelling."Donahoe's sentiment is similar to what we heard from Starbucks earlier this month during the company's investor day. China is a huge part of Starbucks' long-term vision — potentially overtaking the U.S. as its biggest market by 2025 — but it's not smooth sailing just yet."With a partial lifting of Covid restrictions in different cities, I am very pleased to report that our recovery in China is well underway," said Belinda Wong, chairwoman of Starbucks China. "However, given ongoing restrictions under China's dynamic zero-Covid policy and the unpredictability of the future outbreaks, we remain vigilant and our recovery path will continue to be nonlinear."For Apple, its China revenue declined 1% in the quarter ended June 25, with management saying the lockdowns took a bite out of demand. The launch of the iPhone 14 in the middle of this month could catalyze sales. Demand in China for high-end iPhone 14s appears "robust," UBS analysts said in a note Thursday, with wait times for Pro models longer than they were in 2021. "However, somewhat expected, the least expensive iPhone 14 is readily available in China," the firm said, meaning lower demand.The bottom line is that for companies like Nike, Starbucks and Apple, it's all about the reopening story in China. Investors understand its choppy, but further rationalization of pandemic policies will be good news for these companies. We saw it with Club holding Wynn Resorts (WYNN) as the gaming hub of Macao took steps toward welcoming tourists from mainland China again. Shares of Wynn, which has two properties in Macao, soared Monday in response to that news.We're not necessarily saying there's a similar binary-type event that would spark major one-day moves in SBUX or AAPL. However, investors want more clarity around the operating environment in China. As they gain confidence that Beijing is easing off "zero Covid" in a real way, we expect it to work its way into the stock prices of Starbucks, Apple and the like.(Jim Cramer's Charitable Trust is long TJX, COST and SBUX. See here for a full list of the stocks.)As a subscriber to the CNBC Investing Club with Jim Cramer, you will receive a trade alert before Jim makes a trade. Jim waits 45 minutes after sending a trade alert before buying or selling a stock in his charitable trust's portfolio. If Jim has talked about a stock on CNBC TV, he waits 72 hours after issuing the trade alert before executing the trade.THE ABOVE INVESTING CLUB INFORMATION IS SUBJECT TO OUR TERMS AND CONDITIONS AND PRIVACY POLICY, TOGETHER WITH OUR DISCLAIMER.  NO FIDUCIARY OBLIGATION OR DUTY EXISTS, OR IS CREATED, BY VIRTUE OF YOUR RECEIPT OF ANY INFORMATION PROVIDED IN CONNECTION WITH THE INVESTING CLUB.  NO SPECIFIC OUTCOME OR PROFIT IS GUARANTEED.Got a confidential news tip? We want to hear from you.Sign up for free newsletters and get more CNBC delivered to your inboxGet this delivered to your inbox, and more info about our products and services. © 2023 CNBC LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Division of NBCUniversalData is a real-time snapshot *Data is delayed at least 15 minutes. Global Business and Financial News, Stock Quotes, and Market Data and Analysis.Data also provided by ‘Tis the season for discounts and deal hunting.The off-price sector is poised to have a strong holiday season, according to experts, thanks to unusually high inventories across retail and a surge of deal-hungry consumers. However, holiday sales across the board are still expected to increase at slower pace than in 2021, Deloitte forecasted, reflecting an overall slowdown in the economy this year.“When consumerism took a huge cliff and dropped off, [demand] was pretty steady throughout the treasure hunt, off-price environment,” Brett Rose, CEO of United National Consumer Suppliers, told Footwear News in an interview. “Those high inventory levels being dumped back into the secondary market translate to driving prices down in the off-price segment, which alleviates a bit of the pressure from inflation.” 









Related




Ross Stores Inc. Is Opening 100 Stores in 2023: Here's Why







SaksOff5th.com Hires SVP of E-Commerce as Priorities Shift for 2023







Marshalls Stores Closing Locations List Includes Philadelphia & Minneapolis Due to 'Real Estate Strategies'




According to Rose, whose company distributes products to several off-price retailers, including Ross Stores and some TJX-owned stores, chains like TJX Companies, Ross, Five Below, Dollar Tree, Dollar General and Family Dollar have continued to see strong traffic throughout 2021 and 2022. Now, the discount sector will continue to benefit from its ability to offer deal hunters lower prices in a holiday season plagued by inflation.Rose added that an increase in “brand agnostic consumers” will also benefit the off-price sector, which typically offers off-brand versions of popular items like leggings and footwear.“There is a big shift to either store-brand are off-brand, because they realize, in many cases, it’s the same quality and a better value,” Rose said.According recent data from foot traffic analytics firm Placer.ai, visits to luxury and off-price retailers have outpaced the greater apparel retail category since the week of Aug. 8, though both categories were still down compared to last year. This data suggests that the gap between luxury and off-price shoppers is expected to widen this season, explained Placer.ai head of analytical research R. J. Hottovy in a report, with both of these categories seeing the bulk of the traffic.While the state of inventory and deal-hunting are tailwinds, the off-price sector will still have to compete with deep discounts across mainstream retail as well, as stores look to offload inventory in their own channels. For example, retailers like Target and Walmart have mentioned increasing markdowns in their stores to clear through excess inventory in categories like apparel. In many cases, these markdowns have been branded as early holiday or Black Friday deals.  








“Bargains won’t be confined to off-price, they will be pretty widespread across the whole retail sector, and this could take the edge away from off-price,” explained managing director of GlobalData Neil Saunders. For example, Macy’s said in Q2 that the holiday shopping season would commence in October and noted that it would increase markdowns across inventory as needed.At the same time, shoppers are more likely to aim for smaller basket sizes, even in off-price stores, to save money, Saunders said. Overall, almost one-third of U.S. consumers are planning to spend less this holiday season due to inflationary concerns, according to a recent Gartner survey. And 28% of consumers said they will be cutting spending as a result of brands raising prices due to inflation. So despite a desire for deals, consumers appear to be looking to save money where ever they can.“I expect the whole off-price segment to perform reasonably well over the holidays,” Saunders said. “However, this won’t be a boom year like 2021 — this will be a lot more subdued.” 










		Footwear News is a part of Penske Media Corporation. © 2023 Fairchild Publishing, LLC. All Rights Reserved.FN and Footwear News are registered trademarks of Fairchild Publishing, LLC. All rights reserved.
		

		Powered by
		
			WordPress.com VIP		
Access exclusive content
								By subscribing, I agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA Enterprise and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.							Footwear News is a part of Penske Media Corporation. © 2023 Fairchild Publishing, LLC. All Rights Reserved.Chip SomodevillaChip SomodevillaThe TJX Companies, Inc. (NYSE:TJX) is a leading off-price apparel and home fashions retailer in the United States and worldwide that operates over 4,500 stores in four major business segments: Marmaxx, which includes their T.J. Maxx and Marshalls chains; HomeGoods; TJX Canada; and TJX International.The company is an opportunistic purchaser of merchandise at prices that allow them to resell at 20% to 60% below full-price retail at still profitable levels. With inventory piling up at other traditional retailers, such as Walmart (WMT) and Target (TGT), the acquisition environment is especially attractive for TJX. With margins still below trend, the favorable buying environment provides an attractive opportunity for improvement.Additionally, with consumers increasingly stretched thin on higher prices in seemingly every category of goods and services, any discount they can get would come as welcome relief. And with the holidays right around the corner, Thanksgiving Day dinner is likely causing anxiety for many households. This could result in greater traffic into TJX's chain of stores for shoppers addressing their holiday wish lists following the Thanksgiving Day holiday.With earnings on deck, margins, inventory levels, and the state of the consumer are likely to be three top topics of interest among active investors. With shares already at the top-end of their trading range, there isn't much room for error. A miss coupled with negative commentary, especially surrounding inventory levels, could send shares tumbling. On the other hand, shares could also soar higher on hints of future outperformance, such as greater traffic levels and better-than-expected margins.At any rate, it's best to view TJX on a longer-term horizon. And with this view, the company is among the best retailers to include in a diversified portfolio. Its scale and leadership position sets it apart from their competition, and the value proposition of their goods provides a defensive hedge against broader market downturns. Together, this makes for a durable portfolio holding through any economic environment.Heading into their earnings release, TJX is one outlier among the broader S&P 500. At over $70/share, the stock is trading near the top-end of their 52-week range. And YTD, shares are little changed. This compares to a YTD decline of over 15% in the broader index. Comparably, the stock is also holding up better than similar off-price retailers, such as Ross Stores (ROST) and Burlington (BURL), who are down 14% and 50% YTD, respectively.Seeking Alpha - Total Returns Of TJX Compared To PeersSeeking Alpha - Total Returns Of TJX Compared To PeersIn prior releases, TJX has had a mixed record. While their earnings generally come in ahead of expectations, they have had a greater tendency to miss on revenue projections. Over the last three quarters, for example, they left over +$700M of expectations unfilled.Seeking Alpha - EPS And Revenue History Of TJX Compared to Consensus EstimatesSeeking Alpha - EPS And Revenue History Of TJX Compared to Consensus EstimatesFollowing the prior four releases, shares tracked lower initially, but always rebounded shortly thereafter. And currently, shares are back to the levels last seen at the beginning of 2022.YCharts - Recent Share Price History Of TJX Following Release Of EarningsYCharts - Recent Share Price History Of TJX Following Release Of EarningsIn Q3, sales are expected to be in the range of +$12.1B to +$12.3B, with a pretax margin of 10.1% to 10.4%, inclusive of higher incremental freight and wage expenses. This would be a notable improvement over pretax margins of 9.3% reported in Q2. That was down 150 basis points ("bps") from the same period last year. Margins would still be down from last year even if they came in within range in Q3 but by a lesser amount of between 60 and 90bps.In addition, margins in excess of 10% would also close the gap to ROST, who historically operated on higher margins than TJX, due to the lower margin structure of TJX's European and HomeGoods businesses, but has experienced a declining rate in recent periods as opposed to TJX, whose performance has strengthened on improving merchandise margin and effective expense management.YCharts - EBIT Margins Of TJX Compared To PeersYCharts - EBIT Margins Of TJX Compared To PeersQ3 earnings may also reflect even stronger merchandise margins resulting from the favorable buying environment created by the inventory woes of major retailers, such as TGT and WMT. TGT's second quarter earnings, for example, were down 90% from last year due in part to discounting and promotional activity on their excess inventory. Likewise, even after elevated levels of discounting, WMT noted that they still have about +$1.5B in inventory that they would like to sell.As a percentage of quarterly revenues, inventories are above 10-year averages at most major retailers. Macy's (M) has been one exception due to company-specific supply chain constraints that allowed them to clear out excess goods but have kept certain items in short supply. But between TGT and WMT, inventories are still tracking ahead of averages, even more so with TGT than WMT.YCharts - Inventory To Sales Ratio Of TJX Compared To Other RetailersYCharts - Inventory To Sales Ratio Of TJX Compared To Other RetailersAnd as a percentage of total quarterly assets, inventories are above averages everywhere, including at Macy's.YCharts - Inventories As A Percentage Of Quarterly Assets Of TJX Compared To Other RetailersYCharts - Inventories As A Percentage Of Quarterly Assets Of TJX Compared To Other RetailersElevated inventory among the various retailers is notable because, for an off-price retailer such as TJX, it creates a more favorable purchasing environment that was not available last year. Typically, TJX acquires their products through two primary means, via closeout inventory from local stores or directly from vendors and factories located primarily in Asia. Historically, the ratio is weighted significantly to closeout purchases, at about 75% of total purchases.But due to abnormally tight inventory levels last year, TJX was forced to source more of their merchandise from overseas, which is a lower-margin sourcing method compared to closeout inventory. Record freight costs only made it that much more expensive.This year, however, with the market flush with wholesale inventory, especially in Q2, TJX was in a prime position to capitalize on the favorable environment. Management recognized as much by noting in their Q2 conference calls the flood of opportunities available in the market.St. Louis Fed - Chart Of Merchant Wholesale InventoriesSt. Louis Fed - Chart Of Merchant Wholesale InventoriesThis doesn't necessarily imply that boom times are ahead for the company. After all, inventories are at elevated levels at TJX as well. In the prior quarter, inventories were up 39% from last year. Additionally, consumers have increasingly become more price sensitive as rising costs continue to eat away at personal savings rates. Granted, inflationary pressures are down from the record levels seen in June, but it remains elevated at 7.7%.For lower-income households, there are more pressing spending priorities, such as food and energy bills than treasure hunting at off-price retailers. This was reflected in September's retail report, which came in flat from the prior month. This, however, is likely to be more of an issue for ROST, who is more exposed to consumers on the lower end of the income spectrum.TJX, on the other hand, has a broad base of customers. So, while there may be some softness from certain customers, there may be an offset from those with more discretionary purchasing power. Recent sales trends at luxury outlets support the notion that those with the means are unlikely to scale back significantly, despite inflationary pressures. If anything, TJX is likely to see an increase in higher-income customers as they, themselves, increasingly seek out bargains to offset pressures elsewhere.Even though inventories are up, what's more important is the turnover of existing stock. In the most recent quarter, it took about 75 days to sell inventory. While this is up about five days over the last twelve months ending in the second quarter, it is on par with ROST and significantly better than many other retailers.Author's Calculations Of Cash Conversion Cycle Of TJX And Other Retailers Using Data Obtained From Quarterly Financial StatementsAuthor's Calculations Of Cash Conversion Cycle Of TJX And Other Retailers Using Data Obtained From Quarterly Financial StatementsAny further slowdown in the turnover rate, however, is likely to result in greater promotional and discounting activity, which may cut into margins in future periods. Over the last twelve months, there were some signs of this. Compared to the last fiscal year, for example, TJX experienced an increasing ratio in cost of goods sold ("COGS") and sales in conjunction with a declining turnover ratio for the last twelve months ending in the second quarter. This is indicative of a weakened demand environment marked with price reductions.Author's Analysis Of The Relationship Between The COGS/Sales And Inventory Turnover RatiosAuthor's Analysis Of The Relationship Between The COGS/Sales And Inventory Turnover RatiosTJX is a leading off-price retailer in apparel and home fashions with a market cap more than double that of their closest competitor, Ross Stores. Its global presence and adeptness in managing their supply chain, along with their top-grade relationships with their vendors are several competitive advantages that set it apart from other retailers.The company's business model is particularly advantageous in the current market environment, where value and bargains are forefront on the minds of consumers. Their exposure to consumers across the income spectrum also insulates them from concentration risks of being too dependent on more cash-strapped consumers, as in the case of Ross.Ahead of earnings, shares are trading at the top end of their 52-week range and are up nearly 14% over the past month. This is ahead of the broader market index and in line with Ross but significantly behind Burlington, which is up over 30% on the month.At just under 24x forward earnings, shares don't immediately appear to be a bargain. Additionally, at current levels, shares are trading at an intrinsic price point slightly above a target calculated in a prior analysis. Nevertheless, the company has extended upside due to its value appeal among customers hit hard by rising costs.With the holidays right around the corner, it wouldn't be surprising to see more consumers turn to TJX's chain of stores to fulfill their shopping needs. Inventory that would have likely been acquired at very favorable pricing would also translate to higher margins, which would appeal to larger institutional investors. For investors seeking a quality bargain retailer for their portfolios, TJX is a trusted name to be overweight on and one to be added on any price weakness.This article was written byDisclosure: I/we have no stock, option or similar derivative position in any of the companies mentioned, and no plans to initiate any such positions within the next 72 hours. I wrote this article myself, and it expresses my own opinions. I am not receiving compensation for it (other than from Seeking Alpha). I have no business relationship with any company whose stock is mentioned in this article.In this articleCheck out the companies making headlines before the bell:Lowe's (LOW) – Lowe's rose 1% in the premarket after it reported quarterly earnings of $4.67 per share, 9 cents above estimates. The home improvement retailer saw both revenue and comparable store sales come in below analyst forecasts but predicted full-year earnings would come in at the top end of its guidance range.Target (TGT) – Target fell 3.3% in premarket trading after the retailer reported quarterly earnings of 39 cents per share, well short of the 72-cent consensus estimate. Target's revenue matched estimates, but it cut prices significantly during the quarter to reduce excess inventory. Target said the 1.2% operating margin rate during the second quarter would improve to about 6% in the back half of the year.TJX (TJX) – The parent of the T.J. Maxx and Marshalls retail chains beat estimates by 3 cents with a quarterly profit of 69 cents per share, but revenue and comparable store sales came in less than expected. TJX cut its full-year forecast as well, saying inflation impacted the spending habits of its customers, and the stock fell 1.2% in the premarket.Krispy Kreme (DNUT) – Krispy Kreme tumbled 14.7% in premarket action after the doughnut chain reported lower-than-expected profit and revenue for the second quarter. Krispy Kreme said it is seeing significant deceleration in commodity costs in recent weeks.Manchester United (MANU) – Manchester United rose 4.6% in the premarket after Elon Musk tweeted that he was buying the British football team and then subsequently said he was joking.Bed Bath & Beyond (BBBY) – Bed Bath & Beyond surged 22.8% in the pre-market after registering over 20% gains in each of the past three sessions. The retailer's shares – which have been popular with "meme stock" investors, are up in 14 of the past 15 sessions, more than quadrupling in value over that stretch.Agilent Technologies (A) – Agilent rallied 6.6% in premarket trading after the life sciences and diagnostics company reported better-than-expected quarterly profit and revenue. Agilent also raised its full-year forecast on strong order flow.Southwest Gas (SWX) – Southwest Gas rose 4.7% in premarket action after investor Carl Icahn raised his stake in the utility company to 8.7% from 7.6%.Sanofi (SNY) – Sanofi shares slid 5.4% in premarket trading after the French drug maker halted development of breast cancer treatment amcenestrant. The halt came after a trial showed no signs that the drug was effective.Got a confidential news tip? We want to hear from you.Sign up for free newsletters and get more CNBC delivered to your inboxGet this delivered to your inbox, and more info about our products and services. © 2023 CNBC LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Division of NBCUniversalData is a real-time snapshot *Data is delayed at least 15 minutes. Global Business and Financial News, Stock Quotes, and Market Data and Analysis.Data also provided by Nov 16 (Reuters) - TJX Cos Inc (TJX.N) raised annual same-store sales forecast and beat quarterly profit estimates on Wednesday, as cash-strapped consumers turn to the discount store for affordable clothing and home decor items ahead of the crucial holiday season.Lower-income consumers, hit by decades-high inflation, have shown a preference for shopping at stores such as TJX that offer branded products at cheaper prices.Analysts have said that TJX is well-positioned to capture more consumer traffic than other retailers due to its value-positioning, especially with people refreshing their wardrobes as they return to work and attend social events.Retailer Target Corp (TGT.N), which forecast gloomy holiday-quarter sales on Wednesday as consumers cut back spending on discretionary items, said it expects to offer steeper holiday discounts to clear excess inventory.View 2 more stories Off-price retailers including TJX, which offers a compelling assortment of goods at reasonable prices compared to other brands and companies, will definitely benefit as consumers trade down, said Jessica Ramírez, analyst at Jane Hali and Associates.Separately, TJX named John Klinger as its new finance chief effective Jan. 29. Klinger succeeds Scott Goldenberg who has been the company's finance head since 2012.TJX third-quarter gross profit margin fell 0.4 percentage point to 29.1% from a year earlier, as it battles higher freight and labor costs due to lingering supply chain disruptions, the Russia-Ukraine war and surging inflation.The HomeGoods stores owner expects 2023 same-store sales to decrease 1% to 2%, compared to its earlier forecast of a 2% to 3% drop.It now sees full-year adjusted profit per share between $3.07 and $3.11, compared with its prior outlook of $3.05 to $3.13.Excluding items, TJX earned 86 cents per share in the third quarter, topping analysts' estimates of 80 cents, but sales missed estimates.Shares of the Framingham, Massachusetts-based company were up about 1%.Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles.The U.S. Justice Department's complaint aimed at stopping JetBlue Airways Corp from buying rival discount carrier Spirit Airlines Inc will force the companies to explain why very high market shares on some routes will not mean higher prices for consumers.Reuters, the news and media division of Thomson Reuters, is the world’s largest multimedia news provider, reaching billions of people worldwide every day. Reuters provides business, financial, national and international news to professionals via desktop terminals, the world's media organizations, industry events and directly to consumers.Build the strongest argument relying on authoritative content, attorney-editor expertise, and industry defining technology.The most comprehensive solution to manage all your complex and ever-expanding tax and compliance needs.The industry leader for online information for tax, accounting and finance professionals. Access unmatched financial data, news and content in a highly-customised workflow experience on desktop, web and mobile. Browse an unrivalled portfolio of real-time and historical market data and insights from worldwide sources and experts.Screen for heightened risk individual and entities globally to help uncover hidden risks in business relationships and human networks.All quotes delayed a minimum of 15 minutes. See here for a complete list of exchanges and delays.© 2023 Reuters. All rights reservedThe inventory glut that dragged down U.S. retailers over the past two quarters may only be getting worse. For shoppers, that means better deals.Inventory levels have increased sequentially and are at the highest level relative to sales since the start of the pandemic, UBS Group AG analysts led by Jay Sole said in a recent note.Nike Inc. said Thursday that its North American inventories grew by a whopping 65% in the fiscal first quarter ended Aug. 31, well above the growth that set off alarm bells earlier this year at companies such as Walmart Inc., Target Corp. and Gap Inc.Americans have largely shifted their spending away from things like apparel and footwear in favor of travel and entertainment — leaving retailers with far more merchandise than they can sell at full price. At the same time, slower economic growth, inflation and higher interest rates are adding to concerns that consumers may slow their purchases in the second half of this year."The biggest variable impacting how quickly companies can clear excess inventory is consumer demand," the UBS analysts wrote on Sept. 21. "If consumer demand is weak, discounts will need to be steeper and this would result in more gross margin pressure."Nike said late deliveries and early holiday orders contributed to its inventory glut. Chief Financial Officer Matthew Friend said he expects the situation to have a "transitory impact on gross margins this fiscal year." The company will tighten its "inventory buys around the world based on some of the risks that could materialize in the second half," he said.Retailers use a number of strategies to offload excess stuff, including discounting or holding merchandise for another season. The problem with fashion merchandise specifically is that "it doesn't get better with age and the longer companies hold excess goods, the deeper the markdown they will eventually have to take on those items," the analysts at UBS said.Another option is to sell unwanted goods to off-price retailers like TJX Cos Inc. and Burlington Stores Inc."We're going to have some of the best branded content we've had in a while," TJX CFO Scott Goldenberg said on an August earnings call.Channel Control Merchants LLC, an inventory liquidation company that operates about 90 off-price stores throughout the U.S. southeast, has added an additional 25 retailer clients in the last eight months, said Chief Executive Officer Chris Homewood."We have seen more access to brands that we haven't in the past, there's higher-end inventory," Homewood said. "We're seeing access to inventory and brands that we traditionally had not seen before, and it's at a killer value."This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.https://www.barrons.com/articles/ross-tjx-stock-retailers-off-price-51668790350The pandemic was a windfall to nearly all retailers—except for off-price. There’s some hope, however, that that losing streak might finally be ending.The pandemic years were good for retail: Many Americans were flush with cash and had little in the way of entertainment options beyond shopping. However that dynamic largely didn’t extend to the off-price group, which includes TJ Maxx owner 
        

            TJX
          

       (TJX), 
        

            Ross Stores
          

       (ROST), and 
        

            Burlington Stores
          

       (BURL). Their highly successful treasure hunt business model thrives on in-person shopping, and snarled supply chains led to worries about their ability to stock merchandise.Already a member?
          
            Sign In
          
The pandemic was a windfall to nearly all retailers—except for off-price.An error has occurred, please try again later.Thank youThis article has been sent toCopyright ©2023 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights ReservedThis copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by our Subscriber Agreement and by copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact Dow Jones Reprints at 1-800-843-0008 or visit www.djreprints.com.
This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by
our Subscriber Agreement and by copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact
Dow Jones Reprints at 1-800-843-0008 or visit www.djreprints.com.
https://www.wsj.com/articles/retailers-holiday-discounts-are-steeper-this-year-cfos-say-11669158347Listen to article(2 minutes)Retail finance chiefs are entering the busiest shopping season of the year with declining profit margins as their companies offer more discounts to compete for sales and clear out excess stock. Profit margins in the sector have shrunk in recent months due to a mix of high inflation, excess inventory and growing expectations from consumers for price reductions. Among retailers in the S&P 500 that reported financial results through Nov. 22, the average margin on earnings before interest and taxes declined to 10.7% in the third quarter from 13.2% in the year-earlier period, according to S&P Global Market Intelligence. 47 mins agoLive Coverage1 hour ago47 mins agoLive Coverage1 hour ago21 mins ago1 hour ago5 hours ago9 hours ago10 hours ago7 hours agoContinue reading your article witha WSJ subscriptionAlready a member? Sign InWSJ MembershipCustomer ServiceTools & FeaturesAdsMoreDow Jones ProductsWSJ MembershipCustomer ServiceTools & FeaturesAdsMoreCopyright ©2023 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by
our Subscriber Agreement and by copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact
Dow Jones Reprints at 1-800-843-0008 or visit www.djreprints.com.
Got a confidential news tip? We want to hear from you.Sign up for free newsletters and get more CNBC delivered to your inboxGet this delivered to your inbox, and more info about our products and services. © 2023 CNBC LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Division of NBCUniversalData is a real-time snapshot *Data is delayed at least 15 minutes. Global Business and Financial News, Stock Quotes, and Market Data and Analysis.Data also provided by In this articleCNBC's Jim Cramer on Wednesday offered a list of off-price retailer stocks investors should have on their radar."There's an inventory glut in the traditional retailers and the big chains are desperate to get rid of this stuff so they can bring in new product," the "Mad Money" host said. "The off-price chains are the buyers of last resort."Here is his list of companies investors should be eyeing:Retail giants have reported earnings this week, with some faring better than others. Walmart beat on earnings and revenue in its second quarter results reported Tuesday. But the company reiterated its profit warning from last month, and CEO Doug McMillon cautioned in an interview Tuesday on "Squawk on the Street" that even wealthy consumers are becoming more frugal due to inflation.Target reported a wider-than-expected miss on earnings in its latest quarter on Wednesday and saw profit fall nearly 90% from the same period the year before. The company had warned in June that its plans to get rid of excess inventory would be a headwind to its bottom line.Cramer said that Target's dismal results reflect consumers' shift in appetite for experiences rather than goods, stemming largely from a desire to go out after staying inside during the height of the pandemic.While this change in consumer spending means there's a window to buy off-price retailers, investors should understand these stocks are long-term opportunities, he added."It doesn't mean that they're doing that great right now," he said.Click here to download Jim Cramer's Guide to Investing at no cost to help you build long-term wealth and invest smarter.Sign up now for the CNBC Investing Club to follow Jim Cramer's every move in the market.DisclaimerQuestions for Cramer? Call Cramer: 1-800-743-CNBCWant to take a deep dive into Cramer's world? Hit him up! Mad Money Twitter - Jim Cramer Twitter - Facebook - InstagramQuestions, comments, suggestions for the "Mad Money" website? madcap@cnbc.comGot a confidential news tip? We want to hear from you.Sign up for free newsletters and get more CNBC delivered to your inboxGet this delivered to your inbox, and more info about our products and services. © 2023 CNBC LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Division of NBCUniversalData is a real-time snapshot *Data is delayed at least 15 minutes. Global Business and Financial News, Stock Quotes, and Market Data and Analysis.Data also provided by One of the biggest challenges retailers are facing is an excess of inventory, brought on by a change in consumer spending habits as they grapple with historically high inflation and a slowing economy.Kohl’s Corp. 
        KSS,
        -2.99%
       Chief Executive Michelle Gass said Thursday, following a disappointing earnings report, that the department store chain has dealt with “difficult retail environments in the past.” She may be right, but recent economic data shows that the current inventory situation is unlike anything seen in 15 years.Also read: Here’s why Target was willing to pay so much to sell off excess inventory.This is depicted in the following chart of the ratio of retail inventories to sales for general merchandise stores through June, from the Federal Reserve Economic Database (FRED), using U.S. Census Bureau data.The chart shows inventories divided by monthly sales on a seasonally adjusted basis. The latest reading of 1.61 for June, which is the highest since April 2007, means it would take 1.6 months at the current sales rate to deplete inventory.This is likely what Target Corp. 
        TGT,
        -1.76%
       and Walmart Inc. 
        WMT,
        -0.67%
       were seeing when they warned earlier this year that profits would take a hit as they took quick and early action, such as cutting prices, to get rid of excess inventory. And note that those two retail giants saw inventory growth slow in the latest quarter, while some other retailers saw inventory growth accelerate.Here is what some of the retailers that have reported earnings in the past week are seeing in terms of inventory growth:Datadog's software suffered an outage after midnight Wednesday, and it persisted through the trading session as shares declined nearly 4%. Tomi Kilgore is MarketWatch's deputy investing and corporate news editor and is based in New York. You can follow him on Twitter @TomiKilgore.Tomi Kilgore is MarketWatch's deputy investing and corporate news editor and is based in New York. You can follow him on Twitter @TomiKilgore.Visit a quote page and your recently viewed tickers will be displayed here.
This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by
our Subscriber Agreement and by copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact
Dow Jones Reprints at 1-800-843-0008 or visit www.djreprints.com.
https://www.wsj.com/articles/some-retailers-are-learning-to-love-bulked-up-inventories-11669841467Listen to article(1 minute)While many retailers are discounting, canceling orders and otherwise scrambling to get rid of a glut of goods filling their stores and warehouses, some are embracing their higher inventory levels. Merchants including Dick’s Sporting Goods Inc., Lowe’s Cos. and Walmart Inc. say the rising stocks signal a recovery from last year’s shortages driven by supply-chain disruptions and put them in a strong position to take advantage of consumer demand this holiday shopping period. 51 mins agoLive Coverage1 hour ago51 mins agoLive Coverage1 hour ago25 mins ago1 hour ago5 hours ago9 hours ago10 hours ago7 hours agoContinue reading your article witha WSJ subscriptionAlready a member? Sign InWSJ MembershipCustomer ServiceTools & FeaturesAdsMoreDow Jones ProductsWSJ MembershipCustomer ServiceTools & FeaturesAdsMoreCopyright ©2023 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by
our Subscriber Agreement and by copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact
Dow Jones Reprints at 1-800-843-0008 or visit www.djreprints.com.
Despite offering deep discounts, off-price retailers like TJX aren’t immune to the slowdown in consumer spending. During the second quarter of fiscal year 2023, TJX saw comp store sales drop by 5%. The company — which operates off-price retailers TJ Maxx, Marshalls and HomeGoods — had a drop in categories such as home decor and, to a lesser extent, apparel. The revenue decline is a major contrast to this time last year, in which post-vaccination era sales were up by 81.3% for TJX. Still, compared to the same period in 2019, revenue was up by 21.0% this past quarter. The company’s current figures, while stronger than pre-pandemic levels, showcase the challenges that even popular off-price retailers like TJX face as Americans battle inflation. “U.S. comp sales for the second quarter came in lighter than we expected as we believe historically high inflation impacted consumer discretionary spending,” TJX CEO and president Ernie Herrman said on the earning call. The softening of sales during the last quarter coincided with historic highs in gas and food prices, Herrman added. Net income for the quarter was  $809 million. John Tomlinson, the global director of research at M Science who covers off-price retailers, said TJX’s consumer spending comments seemed to contradict its previous performance. For instance, the group’s revenue was on the rise earlier this year, when food and essentials prices were already spiking. “The one area I do worry about is HomeGoods, where the results were pretty bad,” said Tomlinson. While many home and furniture brands are struggling to maintain their early pandemic sales, home improvement retailers like Home Depot and Lowe’s are still going strong. Home Depot, for example, reported on Tuesday that revenue was up 6.5% year-over-year.The big culprit for TJX’s traffic slowdown is discretionary spending moving toward other leisure activities, such as dining out and vacations. “There’s also a ton of travel this summer, so people likely weren’t out shopping as much,” he added.“We are excited about our many initiatives to drive customer traffic and sales for the fall and holiday selling season, and will be emphasizing our value leadership in our marketing,” Herrman said. He also noted that the company has had “zero pushback” on its price increases, a strategy it took up in the past year.However, there is an apparent bright spot for off-price stores in the coming months.The slew of excess inventory across the retail industry bodes good news for TJX, according to Herrman. With so many retailers offloading their merchandise, Herrman said there is “plenty of goods to go to everybody in the off-price world right now.” “We’re in a great inventory position,” he said on Wednesday’s call. This is especially important because in the fourth quarter, he explained, where name brands become more important for gift giving. “We expect to get some new vendors we didn’t even have last year.” Hermann noted that with gas prices dropping, the company’s topline is positioned to rebound in the next couple of months.Moving into the end of the year, retailers’ outlook will be tested as people begin to shop for the holidays during a potential recession. “We’ll get a better read on consumer spending in the next quarter,” said Tomlinson.Online fashion platforms continue to be squeezed by operational costs. A number of e-commerce startups, including Stitch Fix, ThredUp and The RealReal, reported quarterly losses this past week — with all of them promising to cut costs and reach profitability.
Online fashion platforms continue to be squeezed by operational costs. A number of e-commerce startups, including Stitch Fix, ThredUp and The RealReal, reported quarterly losses this past week — with all of them promising to cut costs and reach profitability.After months of cost-cutting, The RealReal is starting to inch closer to profitability. But its annual loss was still well into the nine figures, the company reported during its fourth quarter earnings call on Tuesday. After announcing layoffs and store closures, the luxury resale startup outlined the measures it’s taking to stop quarterly losses.
After months of cost-cutting, The RealReal is starting to inch closer to profitability. But its annual loss was still well into the nine figures, the company reported during its fourth quarter earnings call on Tuesday. After announcing layoffs and store closures, the luxury resale startup outlined the measures it’s taking to stop quarterly losses.Target has long used retail partnerships to expand its product assortment and differentiate itself from its competitors. But in a period plagued with an array of challenges including higher costs and inflation-weary shoppers, retail partnerships help Target gain more foot traffic and reach more customers. 
Target has long used retail partnerships to expand its product assortment and differentiate itself from its competitors. But in a period plagued with an array of challenges including higher costs and inflation-weary shoppers, retail partnerships help Target gain more foot traffic and reach more customers. Join now to gain access to exclusive content, unlimited articles and more. Visit your account page to modify or renew your subscription.Get Modern Retail's top stories every morning in your email inboxFollow @ModernRetail for the latest news, insider access to events and more.
                
                    
                        Let Retail Dive's free newsletter keep you informed, straight from your inbox.
                    
                
            Topics covered: retail tech, e-commerce, in-store operations, marketing, and more.Topics covered: brand launches, expansion opportunities, partnerships, startup trends, funding, and more.Topics covered:  Retail advertising, social media, analytics, personalization, search, video, and more.Topics covered: e-commerce, payment technology, IT, in-store tech, cyber security, and more.Topics covered: supply chain and logistics, sourcing, real estate, merchandising, and more.From Toys R Us to J.C. Penney, many retailers have filed over the past few years. Here’s who has fallen victim since 2017.Since 2017, Retail Dive has tracked major bankruptcies in the U.S. retail industry. Over the years, we’ve chronicled the long decline of once-dominant chains like Sears, and the unexpected and swift demise of others, like Lord & Taylor. Even in that short timeframe, some retailers have fallen victim to bankruptcy not once, but twice. In 2019 alone, both Gymboree and Payless filed for their second bankruptcies in two years. And in 2020, with many retailers facing shuttered stores and slow traffic, a record number of retailers — including many who had been teetering for years — filed. Some retailers that enter bankruptcy leave most of their stores behind, opting for a more digital-focused approach, while others are bought out by landlords and continue to operate large footprints. Some brands disappear entirely, while others seem to resurrect again and again. After Toys R Us’ swift liquidation in 2018, for example, the iconic toy brand is now sold at Macy’s.The state of bankruptcies says a lot about the health of the retail sector and the various categories it serves. Which retailers file in a given year provides clues about broader consumer trends and gives insight into the differences between retail’s winners and losers.Retail Dive will continue to update this tracker with the latest major retail bankruptcies. These entries provide information on when major retailers filed, the reasons behind the filing and what their plans were at the time.Keep up with the story. Subscribe to the Retail Dive free daily newsletterTuesday Morning filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in February. At the time of its filing, the Dallas-based company said it secured a $51.5 million debtor-in-possession commitment from Invictus Global Management to support the company’s operations during the case.As part of the reorganization, the company expects to shrink its store footprint by more than half, to 200 locations. Tuesday Morning had nearly 500 stores in 40 states last November and about 6,300 full- and part-time workers at that time. The company previously filed for bankruptcy in 2020. In its 2023 Chapter 11 filing, Tuesday Morning had liabilities and assets of between $100 million to $500 million. The parent company of Chuck & Don’s, Loyal Companion, Kriser’s and Natural Pawz, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in February.As part of the restructuring, the company plans to exit its Loyal Companion and Natural Pawz brands and shut down its existing stores on the East Coast, Texas and California. The company will continue to run under its Chuck & Don’s and Kriser’s brands. The retailer began liquidating 93 of its stores on Feb. 3.“This change allows us to create a stronger foundation for our team and our pet parent communities in our core go-forward brands and markets,” Independent Pet Partners wrote on LinkedIn.Party City Holdco in January filed for Chapter 11. It’s seeking a $150 million debtor-in-possession loan. A judge on Jan. 18 granted the company immediate access to $75 million of the loan.The pandemic tanked consumer demand for the company’s mainstay items – costumes, decorations and party favors – when people canceled in-person celebrations. In court documents, Party City said it has liabilities and assets of $1 billion to $10 billion and 10,001 to 25,000 creditors. The company says an “expedited restructuring” would reduce debt and improve liquidity.Party City has over 800 company-owned and franchised stores. The franchised stores, the company’s Anagram balloon business and subsidiaries outside the U.S. are not part of the bankruptcy case.Beauty accelerator Forma Brands – the owner of Morphe, Playa Beauty and more – filed for bankruptcy one week after announcing the closure of all U.S. Morphe retail locations. The filing included a proposed acquisition deal with lenders in which creditors would provide $33 million in funds to take over its wholesale operations, online platforms and international Morphe retail stores.In court documents, Forma revealed it has about $868 million of funded principal debt and interest obligations. The company noted that it began experiencing “liquidity and operational issues a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, widespread changes to consumers’ beauty habits and their need to terminate partnerships with certain influencers.”Sears Hometown Stores filed for bankruptcy in December in the middle of tussling with its parent, TransformCo, also known as “new Sears.” The home goods-focused chain, an offshoot of the once-iconic retail giant, has about 121 stores in 26 states and Puerto Rico, including locations run by independent dealers. That’s down from nearly 500 when “new Sears” reacquired it shortly after its own bankruptcy four years ago.Bankruptcy became necessary in part because Sears Hometown relies “substantially on TransformCo to provide key products and services,” including inventory, which TransformCo failed to provide, according to a bankruptcy court filing from Sears Hometown CEO Elissa Robertson. In 2019, former Sears CEO Eddie Lampert and his ESL financial firm stymied an effort to liquidate Sears Hometown, replacing two board members and changing its bylaws.Medly, founded in 2017, sells medical prescriptions online and through stores in seven states, calling itself the “nation's fastest-growing digital pharmacy.” About a year after expanding through its acquisition of Colorado-based pharmacy chain Pharmaca, Medly in December filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, stating in court documents that its “working capital has dissipated to the point where the Company will be unable to continue operations.” The company also said it “has contacted potential acquirers to discuss potential acquisitions.” In its filing, Medly lists assets and liabilities of between $100 million and $500 million each.What you need to know: Olympia Sports filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in September after starting a full store liquidation process over the summer. At the time of the filing, CEO Mark Coffey said the company chose to enter bankruptcy in order to retain employees and keep operations going as it wound down its footprint.The sporting goods chain, which was founded in 1975 in Portland, Maine, once operated over 230 stores, but ran just 35 stores when it filed. All of those stores were set to close by Sept. 30, 2022. Olympia Sports was acquired by private equity firm CriticalPoint Capital through its JackRabbit running specialist business in 2019.Iconic beauty company Revlon filed for Chapter 11, citing its burdensome capital structure, which includes over $3 billion in debt. It also pointed to struggles with its supply chain and inflation. Revlon CEO Debra Perelman, daughter of Ron Perelman, said that the filing would provide a “clearer path for our future growth” as it addresses its capital structure. “If executed effectively, Revlon could emerge from bankruptcy with a cleaner balance sheet and a better operating profile, improving longer term business prospects,” David Silverman, retail senior director with Fitch Ratings, said in emailed comments. With a past history of financial duress exacerbated by the pandemic, Escada America filed for bankruptcy in January with immediate plans to close five locations, or roughly half its footprint.The company, which is the U.S. retail arm of the Escada women's fashion brand, also blamed inflexible landlords for the need to file. Rather than litigate over leases, the company aims to shed stores and repay creditors while avoiding "a senseless and unnecessary liquidation."By 2010, some six years after its founding in 2004, Alex and Ani’s wire charm bracelets were a hit, steadily fueling sales for the following five years. But troubles began to brew in 2014, when top executives came and went at a rapid pace, disrupting the jewelry retailer’s momentum, according to court documents filed with the bankruptcy court of Delaware.Founder and ex-CEO Carolyn Rafaelian, who owned the company until 2012 when she sold a stake to private equity, has agreed to a resolution of her own legal claims against the company and part-owner Lion Capital, pending the bankruptcy court’s approval. Under the agreement, she would also sell her remaining 35% stake, per the court files.The retailer is swimming in about $127.4 million in outstanding funded debt obligations. The full effect of a 2019 out-of-court restructuring was stymied by a ransomware attack in February 2020 and then the pandemic. Alex and Ani already has a restructuring support agreement with its debt holders and equity sponsors for a financial and operational restructuring, which must be approved by the court, and is looking for a buyer. The retailer plans to keep operations going during the bankruptcy process, including stores “currently open;” about 25 remain closed due to COVID-19. Furthermore, the company says it will look to exit any leases deemed “uneconomic.”Founded in 2001, The Collected Group brought together three fashion brands: Joie (launched that same year), Equipment and Current/Elliott. Operational woes led to a change in private equity owners in 2018 after KKR converted its debt holdings to equity in an out-of-court restructuring. In the years following, the women’s fashion specialist invested in e-commerce and its wholesale channels, boosting profits. But the pandemic landed hard on fashion apparel and brick-and-mortar shopping. Even before filing for bankruptcy, The Collected Group decided to wind down its physical footprint, which included 33 stores at its largest. In filing for bankruptcy, The Collected Group aimed to reduce debt, complete its brick-and-mortar wind-down and restructure around its growing e-commerce business and wholesale.In early March 2020, Paper Source announced a major expansion after acquiring 30 prime store locations from a fallen rival, the stationery and paper goods specialist Papyrus, as that retailer wound down. Later that month, the world turned on its head as the COVID-19 pandemic sparked stay-at-home orders and mass temporary store closures, including all of Paper Source’s stores. The company had been healthy and growing before the public health crisis. But the sales decline for the year led to liquidity constraints as rent bills piled up. In March, the retailer filed for bankruptcy with a plan to close at least 11 stores and sell itself. On filing, it had a credit bid from current lenders to serve as a stalking horse in a proposed Chapter 11 auction of the company.Belk was among those retailers especially vulnerable when the COVID-19 crisis hit. Saddled with nearly $2 billion in debt, a legacy of a leveraged buyout, the southern department store chain’s liquidity fell by 70% last April. The retailer, while working toward a digital transformation, also is heavily dependent on store traffic; its sales fell 32% between March and December 2020. To buttress its finances, the company forged an agreement with lenders that allowed it to shed $450 million in debt, push out maturities, get new capital and let private equity sponsor Sycamore Partners retain majority ownership. The deal, according to the company, hinged on a lightning-quick trip through bankruptcy court. Belk aimed for 24 hours between filing and emerging, reaching out to creditor groups to gain their buy-in. A federal bankruptcy judge signed off on the deal, clearing the way for a speedy exit from Chapter 11 despite alarms raised by the U.S. trustee assigned to the case.With 66 retail stores, Solstice Sunglasses bills itself as the second-largest specialty retailer of sunglasses in the U.S., focusing on high-end brands like Dior, Gucci, Jimmy Choo, Kate Spade and Ray Ban. The luxury boutique said in a press release that it had been hit financially by the COVID-19 pandemic, with sales down more than 50% from 2019 and “limited relief to compensate for stores being closed and shoppers afraid or unable to shop.” The company filed for Chapter 11 in February with the aim of reorganizing and emerging from bankruptcy intact as a going concern. Solstice hired RCS Real Estate Advisors to evaluate its lease footprint but did not immediately say if or how many stores it planned to close. At the time of filing, Solstice CEO Mikey Rosenberg said in a statement that his team was “optimistic about reorganization as we continue to see increasing business in our stores as COVID restrictions are lifted and in the new fashions that our vendors are providing.”Like many retailers since the pandemic began, the U.S. arm of L’Occitane found itself with declining brick-and-mortar sales and expensive leases on the one hand, and rapidly growing online sales on the other. The managing director for the beauty brand’s North American region said that its lease obligations amount to $30.3 million annually across its 166-store footprint. With brick-and-mortar sales falling 56.5% year over year in the months between April and December, the burden of those costs ballooned very suddenly. The company, whose parent was founded in 1976 in Manosque, France, filed for Chapter 11 with immediate plans to close 23 stores and restructure around a smaller footprint and its digital business.Founded in 1956, women’s apparel seller Christopher & Banks specializes in value-priced women’s apparel and targets smaller markets with a pre-bankruptcy store footprint just shy of 450. The COVID-19 pandemic took a huge toll, decreasing demand among its core customer and adding stress to its finances. The company was facing eviction from some stores and, in January, defaulted on key loans and the lease on its headquarters. Christopher & Banks filed for Chapter 11 in mid-January with plans to close all of its stores and sell off its e-commerce business. An affiliate of Hilco Merchant Resources, and a lender to Christopher & Banks, emerged as a stalking horse bidder on its digital business.Created last year out of some of the parts of the liquidated Art Van Furniture, Loves Furniture immediately ran into problems. For one, it was without a permanent logistics hub, with another company picking up Art Van’s Michigan Warehouse. Loves contracted with a third-party logistics company, but said later that shipping issues left its stores less than ready when they opened. Issues getting orders to customers deepened the company’s problems, hurting its sales and, with them, its underlying financials. The logistics provider sued Loves after the retailer fell behind on its payments. It filed for bankruptcy in January in hopes of restructuring around a smaller footprint. In 2019, Francesca’s shook up its C-suite, hunted for a suitor, went on a cost-cutting mission and planned to shift to a fast-fashion model. Instead of working on a turnaround, however, the retailer spent much of 2020 issuing going concern warnings and permanently closing stores as the pandemic slammed its sales and roiled its plans.But the pandemic wasn’t it’s only problem. The retailer, which runs smaller-than-average stores, had been struggling for a while as apparel sales growth ebbed and fewer consumers shopped at malls. A day after its bankruptcy filing, the Nasdaq warned its stock would be delisted on Dec. 15 — something Francesca’s wouldn’t appeal since its investors are taking it private.TerraMar has committed to keeping at least 275 Francesca’s stores open, out of the 558 it was running at the time of its Chapter 11 filing after closing dozens in recent years.Founded in 1959 as a single store selling organs, Guitar Center eventually became the largest musical instrument retailer in the U.S., with more than 500 stores across its brands. After a private equity buyout, it struggled under its debt load throughout the 2010s.When the pandemic forced it to close its stores, Guitar Center ran into liquidity problems. After striking a deal with bondholders during the summer, the company forged an agreement with key lenders and equity holders to restructure the company’s debt and capital structure in Chapter 11.Founded in 1984, Furniture Factory Outlet ran nearly 70 stores in the Midwest and south central U.S. before the pandemic. As the year started, it was making progress on a turnaround, according to its CFO. But the pandemic forced it to lay off 95% of its staff and permanently shutter more than half its footprint amid the financial tumult. Its supply chain has also been upended by the pandemic, hurting its revenue and further constraining liquidity.Owned by private equity firm Sun Capital Partners, the retailer filed for bankruptcy in November with a $7 million bid to take it over from home goods retailer American Freight.Century 21 has been a favorite retailer for six decades, especially among New Yorkers. The company’s headquarters and downtown flagship were destroyed in the 9/11 terrorist attacks. When it was rebuilt at the site of the devastation, it stood as a symbol of the city’s endurance.The retailer was an early entrant in the off-price game, opening its doors in 1961 and selling high-end apparel for savvy fashionistas. While the likes of TJX Cos., Ross and Burlington have downplayed or avoided e-commerce in order to preserve their store-based treasure hunts and protect their margins, Century 21 ran a website to reach customers beyond the four states where it operates.Insurance payments helped the company recover from the destruction in New York 19 years ago, but some $175 million in claims related to the pandemic have been denied, forcing the retailer to close down, according to a statement last week from Century 21 co-CEO Raymond Gindi, a son of the founders.With support of its lenders through the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York, going-out-of-business sales have commenced at all stores in New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Florida and through its website, the company said last week in court documents.Stein Mart’s downward swing in fortunes over 2020 has been dramatic. After years of declining sales and negative profit, it opened the year with a takeover deal by a private equity firm and an entity controlled by its chairman. But the spread of COVID-19, and the ensuing turmoil in the retail industry and financial markets, threw a wrench into those plans. The deal was nixed, by mutual agreement.Not long after, Stein Mart added language to its regulatory filings acknowledging it might not be able to survive as a going concern as COVID-19 upended the industry. The retailer did see traffic increases after reopening its stores, and was able to land a $10 million loan from the federal government’s stimulus package.But events took another downward turn. COVID-19 surged in Texas, Florida and California, along with other states and areas in the U.S. Those three major states account for some 40% of Stein Mart’s stores and led to another crash in finances. Internal projections showed the retailer would soon run out of cash to operate its business.The retailer filed for Chapter 11 with dim hopes for a savior to come along to buy part or all of its business. Barring that outcome — which even the CEO acknowledges is unlikely given the retail market and past unsuccessful efforts to sell itself — Stein Mart is set to liquidate its stores and sell off any assets of value, including its intellectual property and e-commerce operations.The oldest department store in the U.S. last year was acquired by one of the newest e-retailers, an online apparel rental site, for $75 million. The tie-up was seen, warily by some, as promising for both — Lord & Taylor stores would provide Le Tote with the singular marketing that only brick and mortar can provide, while Le Tote would bring Lord & Taylor new, younger customers. The pandemic, and the temporary closures it forced onto nonessential retailers, ensured that the experiment wouldn’t be given a chance to work, however. Privately owned Le Tote in court documents said it notched about $253.5 million in revenue last year, but in April the company announced layoffs of most its workers at both its namesake company and at Lord & Taylor. The company employs 651, and arrived at bankruptcy court with funded debt obligations of about $137.9 million. The real estate arm of previous owner Hudson’s Bay Co. is its largest shareholder, with a 27.6% interest.Tailored Brands, which owns Men’s Wearhouse, Jos. A. Bank, Moores Clothing for Men and K&G, entered into a restructuring agreement supported by over 75% of its senior lenders. This was after months of warnings from the company that it might have to terminate operations or seek bankruptcy protection due to dramatic sales declines brought on by COVID-19. The retailer was struggling prior to the pandemic. Revenues had declined by 5.6% over the past two years, and the company pointed to the casualization of the American office and “the continuing decline in the brick-and-mortar retail industry generally” as primary pain points. As part of a go-forward plan, the company expects to reduce corporate staff, the number of retail locations, and its supply chain infrastructure.A few Ascena brands — tween label Justice and plus brands Lane Bryant and Catherines — along with the very idea of selling to any and all women at all stages of life, came from Les Wexner’s former L Brands empire. Wexner eventually abandoned them, and that vision. Ascena may be finding out why.The COVID-19 pandemic no doubt sped up Ascena’s restructuring — just a few months ago it denied a bankruptcy was in the cards. But it’s hard to pin its woes on that recent shock alone. Ascena’s original business, Dressbarn, never recovered after encountering headwinds years ago, its newer brands were already in trouble when they were acquired, and the multi-brand nature of the enterprise has been unwieldy for some time. The retailer will come out of the process much smaller. Its stable will shrink dramatically, with massive store closures expected (though not yet enumerated). That includes all locations of the Catherine’s plus-size banner, which is being sold to online plus retailer City Chic. With discount brands Dressbarn and Maurices already gone as of last year, the retailer therefore places its hope of a comeback on premium brands Ann Taylor and Loft and plus-size stalwart Lane Bryant. But the challenges it faced before the pandemic — notably the sales declines of those labels and of apparel sales growth more broadly — await.Founded in 1964 by Robert Anderson, The Paper Store has stayed in the Anderson family ever since and stayed close to its New England home. Now it is looking to sell itself after joining the ranks of other gift specialists to go bankrupt in recent years, including the parent of Papyrus as well as Things Remembered.The retailer — which sells stationery, jewelry, home decor as well as fashion, sports and other products — blamed its financial distress on everything from the calendar to weather to football to, of course, COVID-19. The Paper Store voluntarily closed its stores in March and kept them closed through key selling periods, including Easter and Mother’s Day. With unpaid rent and vendor payables mounting, the retailer wasn’t able to cut costs deeply enough to stay out of court, even after slashing its workforce down to a skeleton crew. In bankruptcy, the retailer hopes a buyer steps up for the company, and quick, to ensure its shelves are stocked ahead of the all-important holiday season. A restructuring adviser to the company said a group that includes one of The Paper Store’s creditors has expressed interest in making a stalking horse bid.RTW Retailwinds, owner of the New York & Co. banner along with Fashion to Figure, and Happy x Nature brands, was losing sales and closing stores well before the COVID-19 crisis began. But the pandemic put tremendous strain on the apparel seller’s finances and operations. With its stores closed and revenue in free fall, RTW went into default with landlords, vendors and its bank, Wells Fargo. In April, its CEO-elect resigned unexpectedly, shortly after being appointed, along with four of the company’s board directors. In June, the retailer said that a bankruptcy was “probable,” and later disclosed it may have to close all of its stores in a Chapter 11 scenario.When the company did file for Chapter 11 in July, it planned to close “a significant portion, if not all” of its physical stores. It also was evaluating a sale of the company’s e-commerce business and related intellectual property. Muji USA was formed in 2006 as a subsidiary of a Japan-based conglomerate that operates retail stores, campsites, cafes, hotels, model house builders and multiple other sectors, selling upwards of 7,000 products. The Muji brand was founded in Japan in 1980 as “an antithesis to the habits of consumer society at that time,” according to Muji USA’s chief restructuring officer, John Bittner, a senior managing director with Mackinac Partners. “On one hand, foreign-made luxury brands were gaining popularity within an economic environment of ever-rising prosperity,” Bittner said in court papers. “On the other hand, poor-quality, low-priced goods were appearing on the market and had a polarizing effect on consumption patterns.” Muji became a “critique” of this state of things, with the aim of selling “products that are useful for the customer and maintain an ideal of the proper balance between living and the objects that make it possible,” Bittner added.Minimalist stores, low prices and an array of products including home goods, beauty, apparel, food and more drew lines to some of Muji’s store openings in the U.S. A New York Times writer once called the retailer’s SoHo store “gloriously affordable.”By the end of 2019, the U.S. subsidiary had more than 20 stores, and it was in financial trouble after overexpanding and picking high-rent spaces in choice locations. At the end of the year, it had a negative cash balance of $26.5 million in its loan arrangement with its parent, according to Bittner. The COVID-19 pandemic would force the company to close all of its stores, deepening its woes. In bankruptcy, Bittner said the company aims to close some stores to rightsize its footprint, restructure its operations and grow its online presence. Muji USA plans to exit bankruptcy within six months.Brooks Brothers for the last nearly two decades has been run by Claudio Del Vecchio, who appreciates its 202-year-old history and its reputation for style and quality. But in that time, casual wear has become increasingly more acceptable for the white-collar professionals who are its customer base.The pandemic has tamped down demand further as people continue to work from home, interrupting a turnaround plan that has included seeking a buyer willing and able to provide the necessary resources. That’s still the plan, and analysts say the retailer should be able to easily find a new owner, thanks to brand strength that has endured for more than two centuries despite the upheaval in apparel sales. WHP Global, Authentic Brands Group and Simon Property Group — the latter recently retracted a lawsuit over unpaid rent — have all been named in press reports as potential suitors.Since its founding in Seattle’s Pike Place Market in 1972, Sur La Table has grown steadily. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, it had 126 stores along with a relatively robust e-commerce arm and fast-growing, revenue-generating cooking classes. But over the five years leading up to its bankruptcy, the kitchenware specialist suffered revenue declines and a churn of executives. The CEO who authored the company’s first day declaration was the company’s third since 2017. It also had capital expenses from installing commercial-level kitchens for its classes and debt leftover from a leveraged buyout. The pandemic crisis deepened Sur La Table’s troubles and brought threats and eviction proceedings from landlords. The company filed with a plan to close more than 50 stores and sell itself to what would be a third private equity owner in nearly 15 years, a deal that would keep the company, including a pared-down physical retail presence, intact.Founded in 1989, G-Star Raw credits itself with introducing “luxury denim for the streets.” Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, the company operated 31 stores in the U.S., with a flagship on Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills, California. Like scores of other retailers, G-Star had to close its stores when the pandemic hit the U.S., and has since determined to reduce its footprint to around seven stores (though that number could change if landlords are willing to swallow “significant concessions”), according to the company’s CEO. Along with the financial pain of the closures, G-Star’s stores suffered “looting during a period of civil unrest” in May and June. In bankruptcy, G-Star hopes to pare its footprint and emerge focused on its remaining profitable stores. The company has no secured debt, but rather a revolving credit account with its Netherlands-based parent.Lucky Brand was one of two denim specialists to file for bankruptcy in a single day in July. Founded in 1990, the brand and retailer eventually grew to have more than 100 stores and 98 outlets in North America. As the story goes with so many retailers, debt — leftover from a leveraged buyout years earlier — left the company burdened as challenges mounted on store retail and apparel in particular. The COVID-19 pandemic exacerbated those challenges. Executive Chairman Matthew Kaness said at the time of filing that the pandemic and its effects have “severely impacted sales across all channels,” and that business has not fully recovered yet. Liquidity strains from store closures related to the pandemic also disrupted the company’s ability to supply its stores with new inventory. Lucky Brand filed for Chapter 11 with plans to jettison about a dozen unprofitable stores and sell itself for at least $140 million. Going into bankruptcy it had a bid from licensing conglomerate Authentic Brands Group and one of the operating companies Authentic Brands works with.Founded in the middle of the Great Depression, the nutrition store chain that would become GNC is no stranger to economic calamity. But, after years of falling sales trying to trim its debt, the COVID-19 pandemic and economic disruption that came with it proved too much to manage outside of bankruptcy.GNC entered bankruptcy with plans to close up to 1,200 stores. It also had multiple parties willing to take it over. Key lenders agreed to a reorganization plan that would turn over ownership to them. On filing, GNC also had a $760 million offer, agreed to “in principle,” from its largest shareholder, the China-based Harbin Pharmaceutical Group. The alternate plans indicate that multiple parties see value in the retailer’s business and are willing to put up capital to save it.On a February conference call, executives at Tuesday Morning made no mention of financial distress or bankruptcy. The off-pricer had issues, to be sure. The company posted net losses for three years running and added only modest growth to its top line. But when the COVID-19 crisis hit in March, the retailer — much smaller than peers like TJX Cos and Ross Stores — watched as its sales went to nearly nothing after it closed its stores.The company called the pandemic disruption an “insurmountable financial hurdle” that forced it into bankruptcy. The company filed for Chapter 11 with hopes of reorganizing around a footprint about a third smaller than its roughly 700 or so stores. Yet Tuesday Morning did not have a negotiated plan with lenders going into bankruptcy court, leaving the ultimate outcome open-ended for now.Centric’s own brands include Hudson, Robert Graham, Swims, Zac Posen and Avirex. The company also licenses more than 100 well known labels, including Calvin Klein, Tommy Hilfiger, Nautica, Hudson Jeans and Under Armour in apparel; Kate Spade, Michael Kors, All Saints and Jessica Simpson in accessories; and Disney, Marvel, Nickelodeon and Warner Brothers in entertainment. With apparel sales growth down and department stores in decline in recent years, the apparel and accessories brands in particular were no doubt already under pressure when the COVID-19 disease broke out worldwide. CEO Jason Rabin said in a statement that the “pandemic disrupted many of our wholesale accounts’ ordering and constrained our cash flow” but also that the agreement forged with the company’s lenders ahead of its Chapter 11 filing positions it for long-term success.Centric will emerge from Chapter 11 as a private company. Debtor-in-possession financing of $435 million will allow it “to operate without interruption throughout the restructuring process,” according to a company press release.After years of trying to engineer a lasting turnaround with mounting losses and constant sales declines, bankruptcy speculation turned into bankruptcy reality for the 118-year-old retailer. Executives painted a picture of a company on the mend until the COVID-19 crisis hit, but J.C. Penney’s challenges were numerous, hefty and persistent well before the pandemic.Still, the pandemic hurt. According to the company’s CFO, sales in April were down 88% year over year and store sales approached zero as Penney closed its stores temporarily while the pandemic spread through the U.S. It also derailed talks with lenders that may have helped it manage its balance sheet outside of a court process.The retailer filed for Chapter 11 with support from key lenders for a plan. But even that pre-negotiated plan allows for multiple outcomes: re-organization with debt relief, a potential sale, or liquidation if the company can’t agree on a go-forward business plan with key lenders in July or if it can’t win third-party financing as it preps an exit. Even so, executives project optimism about the retailer’s future, saying Chapter 11 will allow it to make good on turnaround plans and unveiling plans to reduce Penney’s store footprint by nearly a third.After a booming third quarter, Stage Stores went into a financial tailspin shortly after the year started. Its holiday sales fell below expectations, perhaps by a lot. The missed targets led to a liquidity crunch, as well as layoffs, store closures and diminished plans for its conversion to an off-pricer.The owner of the Bealls, Palais Royal, Peebles, Stage and Goody’s department stores announced last year it would convert its remaining stores to its Gordmans model. That was based on encouraging data from stores it had already converted to Gordmans. But the holiday shortfall wrecked those plans. The company at one point considered a store footprint 200 stores smaller than what it planned as recently as the fall, sources told Retail Dive earlier this year.Stage Stores closed its stores this spring after the COVID-19 crisis hit, squeezing liquidity further and acting as the “proverbial ‘nail in the coffin,’” the company’s chief restructuring officer said later in court papers. Wells Fargo also reduced the retailer’s available borrowings under its revolver; meanwhile Stage Stores was hunting for new capital. But none materialized in time.The retailer filed for bankruptcy with plans to liquidate its business entirely, unless a buyer steps up by June to buy the company and keep it operating.The Canadian Aldo Group shoe seller runs 429 stores and has 3,300 employees in the U.S. The company’s vice president of finance, David Galarneau, called the U.S. “instrumental in the company’s climb to recognition,” with its first store opening in the country in 1993. But both the parent company and U.S. business have been in decline. Aldo U.S. posted a net loss of $52.8 million for the 12 months ending February. The company had a plan to turn around by paring its physical footprint in favor of e-commerce and replacing and buffering working capital with an asset-based lending structure.But the COVID-19 crisis derailed those efforts, forcing stores to close and bringing with it both sales declines and production delays in China. Galarneau said that without immediate financial help in bankruptcy, Aldo would be out of cash by the first week of June.In bankruptcy, Aldo hopes to restructure its debt and operations, including through store exits. The U.S. is such an important component of its turnaround effort that Galarneau said in court papers that the parent would not be able to survive if it cannot restructure Aldo U.S.’s debt obligations.Thanks to an albatross of debt from two rounds of private equity buyouts, it’s been difficult for Neiman Marcus Group to invest in innovations the way Nordstrom or even Macy’s have in recent years. The department store sector in general has been down in the dumps for years now, putting any player with extra burdens like that at particular disadvantage.Still, the century-old Dallas-based retailer has maintained fierce loyalty among some very high-spending customers. And, thanks to a virtual styling service that has helped stoke online sales, the retailer rakes in 30% of its sales from online, even before the COVID-19 pandemic hit. The Mytheresa business, however — the subject of much contention in recent years — isn’t part of the Chapter 11 process and “will continue to operate independently,” the company said.The company runs 67 stores across the U.S., including both department store names, so it isn’t over-stored like some rivals, according to one bankruptcy document. But one of its creditors would nevertheless like to shutter as many as 29 stores, as part of a proposed merger with Saks Fifth Avenue, another luxe department store, if one with a somewhat different clientele.The disease outbreak presents further challenges, including signs of weakness in luxury. After declining by about 25% in the first quarter, the global luxury market is expected to slow further, and could contract 20% to 35% this year, according to Bain and Co.Burdened with debt from a private equity buyout, preppy mainstay J. Crew was a bankruptcy risk for years before the COVID-19 crisis hit. Moreover, some observers say the apparel seller had made several style and quality missteps in its merchandising that hurt its brand.The pandemic appears to have been too much for the retailer to manage without help from a court, especially after the crisis derailed an IPO effort for Madewell, which could have provided much-needed debt relief. The company’s COO, Michael Nicholson, said that the company projected a $900 million decline in sales after closing its stores in March. “Though many companies across all industries faced hardships and tumultuous market conditions, [J. Crew was] uniquely and severely impacted as a customer-facing retailer in an already struggling industry,” Nicholson said.The company filed for Chapter 11 in early May with negotiated plans to convert around $1.7 billion in debt to an equity stake in the company, which would turn control over to lenders. J. Crew is also exploring its store footprint, which numbered about 500 stores at the time of filing. As part of J. Crew’s bankruptcy plan, the fast-growing Madewell brand will stay with the company.Last year, the bulk of Canadian outdoor apparel retailer Roots’ stores in the U.S. racked up a CA$6 million loss. The challenges only steepened with COVID-19 as Roots shuttered all of its North American stores.The parent company decided to pull the plug on Roots USA Corporation, putting it in Chapter 7 bankruptcy with plans to close seven stores in the U.S. That includes locations in Boston, Washington, D.C., Chicago, and a pop-up in New York.Roots hasn’t given up entirely on the U.S. market, though. The company said that it “believes a principally eCommerce-based distribution in the near-term is the best approach to continuing to serve its loyal U.S. customer base.” The Canadian parent also took ownership of two U.S. stores in Utah and Michigan with plans to keep them in operation. Those stores in particular “play important roles in the Company’s heritage and have well-established customer bases,” Roots said.Even before the spread of COVID-19 forced True Religion to close its 87 stores, the denim specialist’s sales were in decline and its profits were negative. After shuttering its footprint in response to the pandemic, 80% of its sales disappeared, according to the company. The retailer filed for Chapter 11 seeking new financing and court protection from its rent obligations for 60 days while its stores remained closed. The bankruptcy was True Religion’s second since 2017, when it filed in an effort to ease its balance sheet of debt left over from a private equity buyout. The company’s interim CFO said True Religion planned to open “many” of its stores “as soon as practical.”Founded in 1889, Modell’s spent the early months of 2020 trying to negotiate deals with landlords and vendors to stave off bankruptcy. The retailer hired RBC Capital Markets to pursue a sale of the sporting goods retailer in January, and while the firm reached out to 14 strategic buyers in recent weeks, and had a “potential bidder” for the company in hand, negotiations fell apart March 10, and a day later the retailer filed.In late February, the company announced it would have to close 19 stores unless it could “appropriately restructure the leases,” and CEO Mitchell Modell announced he would offer a minority stake in the business to an interested buyer. That didn’t happen, and the 19 closures turned into a chain-wide liquidation as Modell recognized it would provide “the greatest recovery for our creditors.”Modell’s pointed to a number of factors that influenced its path to bankruptcy, including the shift to e-commerce, competition from big-box and specialty players, and a series of unfortunate short-term events.Art Van Elslander opened the first Art Van location in Detroit in 1959 and eventually grew his business to be one of the leading furniture retailers in the Midwest. However, as competition grew in the space from both online retailers like Amazon and Wayfair, as well as from mass merchants, traditional furniture retailers like Art Van lost market share. Under “extreme market conditions and faced with limited liquidity,” the furniture retailer filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in Delaware.The founder sold his company to private equity firm Thomas H. Lee Partners in March 2017, and later that year Art Van Furniture acquired Pennsylvania-based companies Levin and Wolf.Aside from a going-concern sale of 44 stores and two distribution centers under its Levin and Wolf banners, the retailer — which also operates Art Van, Art Van PureSleep and Scott Shuptrine Interiors — will close all of its locations through going-out-of-business sales.Bluestem Brands’ direct-to-consumer business spans seven brands, two million customers, multiple categories, and various channels, including online, direct mail and telephone. Holdings include the Appleseed’s, Blair, Draper’s & Damon’s, Gettington, Fingerhut, Haband and Old Pueblo Traders brands.Ahead of bankruptcy, the company faced tightening trade terms with suppliers as it struggled financially. That was exacerbated when S&P Global downgraded the company, with analysts citing “our expectation that the company’s operating performance will remain weak amid continued pressures in the retail industry, and our view of liquidity as less than adequate.”The retailer’s liquidity was also hurt by high debt payments and a weak fourth quarter, a restructuring adviser said in court papers. It filed for bankruptcy with an agreement from Cerberus Business Finance for $125 million in debtor-in-possession financing. Cerberus was also a pre-bankruptcy lender and behind the entity BLST Acquisition Company, which has made a $300 million bid for Bluestem to keep it operating as a going concern, and which would set the baseline for an auction, if one is needed.Following nine consecutive quarters of sales declines, Pier 1 in February filed for bankruptcy. The home goods retailer in January announced plans to close up to 450 of its stores, and upon its filing, said it would close its Canadian operations entirely, which would leave it with about 540 locations in total.The company has commitments for approximately $256 million in debtor-in-possession financing from Bank of America, Wells Fargo National Association and Pathlight Capital to help fund it through bankruptcy. Pier 1 also set up a process to sell itself, in whole or in parts, to bidders in bankruptcy. Over the years, Pier 1 lost market share to competitors like Wayfair, TJX’s HomeGoods and mass merchants.After trying to negotiate with landlords for concessions, the parent of the Papyrus, Paper Destiny, American Greetings and Carlton Cards retail stores threw in the towel and opted to liquidate. Founded in 1950 by Marcel and Margrit Schurman, the Schurman group started out as an importer and wholesaler on the principle that there was a U.S. market for “greeting cards and stationery that intersected with the world of fine art,” a restructuring officer for the company said in court papers.But debt from a poorly-timed expansion — ahead of a major decline in mall traffic — as well as capital costs and financial tensions with a major supplier overpowered the retailer. After quietly initiating a full-scale liquidation, it entered Chapter 11 with plans to close its 200-plus stores.Founded in 1982 as a catalog retailer catering to professional women in need of maternity clothes, Destination Maternity became a leading player in a niche market. But declines in the U.S. birth rate and expanded competition, along with mall traffic declines, knocked nearly a third off the retailer’s top line. As it tried to turnaround, the company burned through five CEOs in as many years — each bringing his or her own strategy vision — and went through a bruising board fight. With liquidity drying up, the company put itself on the market this fall and found some interested parties. But Destination Maternity couldn’t find a savior in time to stave off a full financial meltdown. By October, finances were so tight the retailer stopped paying rent on all locations and held back vendor payments. In Chapter 11 now, it plans to continue marketing itself and is eyeing a December auction for the business. A bankruptcy filing for the fast-fashion retailer has been rumored for months, with the company reportedly hiring restructuring advisers in June. Some operations abroad, including in Mainland China, Taiwan and France, were shuttered even earlier. For years, Forever 21 was a fast-fashion juggernaut, doubling down on its cheap prices in 2014 with an even cheaper offshoot, churning out trendy looks that were here today, gone tomorrow.But the company appears to have missed out on two key trends. In an era when sustainability is gaining traction among apparel consumers, Forever 21 has done little to appeal to them. And it bet heavily on brick and mortar rather than e-commerce; The company first launched online in 2005, and now some 16% of its total sales come from there, according to court documents.The company has obtained $275 million in financing from existing lenders with JPMorgan Chase Bank as agent, plus $75 million in new capital from investment firm TPG Sixth Street Partners. But its troubles center around more than finances or channels, according to GlobalData Retail Managing Director Neil Saunders. “The long-term survival of Forever 21 relies on the chain creating a sustainable and differentiated brand,” he said in emailed comments. “This is something that will be very difficult to accomplish in a crowded and competitive sector.”Since April, Fred’s has been shuttering stores at an accelerated rate, with successive announcements totaling over 430 closures. That represented most of the Southern discount and drugstore retailer’s footprint.Fred’s had tried to turn itself around by focusing on higher-margin private label products, reducing SKUs, expanding its alcohol offering and tightening its budget. It has laid off hundreds of employees and sold major assets, including its specialty pharmacy business. But it wasn’t enough to stabilize its spiraling finances.Fred’s filed for Chapter 11 in September with plans to close all stores, liquidate its operations and sell off its remaining pharmacies (about 170 in all).Avenue Stores went into bankruptcy with a plan to wind down all of its remaining 222 stores and sell its e-commerce operation. The filing came after the company, unbeknownst to employees and customers, opted to wind down its physical footprint and held a quiet auction for liquidators to run the going-out-of-business sales. The plus-size women’s apparel retailer was formed more than 30 years ago from the spin-off of Limited Brands’ combined Lerner Woman and Sizes Unlimited units. After spinning off from Limited, it was acquired by Redcats USA, filed for bankruptcy in 2012 and then bought out of bankruptcy by private equity firm Versa Capital Management.Five profitable years followed. But new competition in the plus-size space from mass merchants and fashion stalwarts cut into sales while discounting, dwindling traffic, e-commerce and debt took their toll on the company. A little over one year after A’gaci exited its first Chapter 11, it found itself back in bankruptcy court again. However, this time around the retailer has the intention of closing all of its stores. The San Antonio-based retailer began going-out-of-business sales in early August shortly after filing under Chapter 11 in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Western District of Texas San Antonio Division.At the time of its filing, A’gaci said it expects the majority of store closings to be completed by Aug. 31. Just prior to the retailer filing, it shut down its e-commerce operations, and updated its return and exchange policies. This came as social media users buzzed about notices and locked doors at several of A’gaci’s physical store locations in Texas.In documents filed with the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York, Barneys revealed that all the stores closing have historically operated at a loss. Furthermore, the company has been short on cash and “operating without sufficient liquidity throughout the summer.” The retailer attempted to work with landlords to reduce rents on its properties, which it pointed to as one of the reasons behind its current financial troubles.The company also pointed to problems with sales performance from February to June this year, which decreased revenue by $34 million.Prior to filing Chapter 11, the company was attempting a sale. The retailer has until October to find a buyer or it may liquidate.A little over a year after exiting Chapter 11 on its first go around, Charming Charlie filed for bankruptcy again in July, this time with plans to wind down and close all 261 of its remaining stores.The retailer’s CFO said “onerous” leases, issues with inventory and vendors, and the continuing slowdown in brick-and-mortar retail left it unable to support its capital and cost structure.Founded in 2004 by Charles Chanaratsopon, the retailer made its name largely by its approach to merchandising, grouping products together by color and pricing them between department stores like Macy’s and teen retailers like Claire’s.Going out of business sales at the accessories and apparel retailer are expected to yield $30 million in revenue. At the time of filing, the company had 856 full-time and 2,486 part-time employees.Z Gallerie is a home decor retailer headquartered in Los Angeles with 76 stores nationwide, operating in a space that’s sitting in the midst of disruption. Subject to court approval, the business will have $28 million debtor-in-possession financing from secured lender KeyBank National Association.Outside of the announced 17 store closures, Z Gallerie is expected to keep physical locations and its website open and operational through the duration of bankruptcy processes, pending funding approval by the courts. Court documents state that the retailer estimates up to $500 million in assets.Diesel USA is a subsidiary of its parent company, Diesel S.p.A. Along with 28 stores, the business has wholesale partnerships with a variety of retailers including Nordstrom Rack, Saks Fifth Avenue and Amazon.com, among others.The company cited a number of factors that led to its bankruptcy filing, including a decrease in wholesale orders, a dramatic decline in net sales and instances of theft and fraud. Prior to filing the retailer attempted to renegotiate leases with landlords and will not pursue the renewal of leases on a number of underperforming locations. According to the filing, “closing certain expensive, long-term, and underperforming stores as well as obtaining relief from other burdensome executory contracts is crucial to its ability to continue operating.”Diesel USA has additional plans to revamp its e-commerce platform and grow wholesale operations.The discount shoe company spent last year closing down some 900 stores and cutting jobs at its headquarters after emerging from bankruptcy late in 2017. That plan was agreed to by lenders, which at that point largely owned the company. Without a buyer in sight, though, the business now is mostly disintegrating, and its wind-down has been swift so far. The retailer operates about 3,400 stores in more than 40 countries, a footprint that Stephen Marotta, appointed last month as the company’s chief restructuring officer, said in a statement contributed to its demise, and is closing a massive number of them — nearly half the store closures that Coresight Research recently estimated the U.S. would see this year.“We expect all stores to remain open until at least the end of March and the majority will remain open until May,” a spokesperson told Retail Dive in an email. “This process does not affect the Company’s franchise operations or its Latin American stores, which remain open for business as usual.”As Things Remembered prepped for bankruptcy, it was also apparently working out a deal that could preserve at least some of its retail operations and jobs — the company otherwise reportedly faced the closure of most of its 400 stores. The retailer announced the sale and the filing the same day.It was a close call for the 40-year-old retailer, which was acquired in 2012 by private equity firm Madison Dearborn from two other PE firms. Madison Dearborn exited that investment in 2017, the firm last month told Retail Dive in an email. Like many PE-backed retailers, Things Remembered, which last year attempted to boost sales through an Amazon storefront, is burdened with debt, which Reuters last month pegged at about $120 million. Leadership has also been upended more than once, as several top employees have come and gone in recent years, according to the LinkedIn pages of past executives.As a mall-based, teen apparel retailer owned by private equity (acquired by Advent International in 2009 in a $380 million take-private buyout), Charlotte Russe joins other embattled retailers hampered in a turnaround. Already under pressure to notch sales, the debt level creates a situation that “doesn’t work,” according to Greg Portell, lead partner in the global consumer and retail practice of strategy and management consulting firm A.T. Kearney.″[T]hese aren’t companies whose growth will outpace debt service,” he said in comments emailed to Retail Dive, adding that it’s a distraction from their basic task of retailing. “While it’s true that consumer preferences are changing, successful retailers are those that can adapt to those tastes and curate goods and experiences consumers value. Retailing is not an easy exercise. Beyond the financial aspect, it requires talented merchants, skilled store labor and an inspirational vision.”Even less hobbled retailers are struggling to keep up with disruption in the sector, but those like Charlotte Russe, distracted by their financial difficulties, including their real estate, are destined to fall even further behind. “Beyond the financial aspect, it requires talented merchants, skilled store labor and an inspirational vision,” Portell said. “Without those attributes, retailers will struggle. Without bold action, the retail landscape will continue to be scattered with bankruptcies.”Plus-size apparel retailer FullBeauty announced in early January that it was expecting to file Chapter 11. In a surprise move, the company filed and received approval on a restructuring plan in 24 hours. The company agreed to turn over control to its lenders and slashed $900 million in debt, according to court documents.In between filing and receiving approval for the restructuring plan, U.S. Trustee William Harrington filed an objection, stating that they company was rushing through the Chapter 11 too quickly. Those objections were overruled.After months of rumor and speculation, Gymboree filed its second bankruptcy in as many years in mid-January. Through the Chapter 11 process, the children’s retailer is shedding its unsuccessful brands, something a few analysts were surprised didn’t happen during the retailer’s last bankruptcy, and plans to sell the still-relevant Janie and Jack brand, as well as the IP and online platform for Gymboree. CEO Shaz Kahng noted in a statement that the retailer would be using the bankruptcy process to “preserve” the Janie and Jack brand, despite having to let go of both its namesake brand and the lower-priced Crazy 8 brand.In its second life, Gymboree faced intense pressure from rivals like The Children’s Place, as well as from big-box retailers like Target and even discount players like T.J. Maxx. The retailer also pointed to Gap as a direct competitor and noted that its secondary competitors are selling clothes “at increasingly cheaper prices.” Competition impacted the amount of traffic the retailer received, which led to discounting and slimmer profits, per court documents, and the consumer shift to online didn’t help either.Shopko is in the middle of an unfolding story about debt and assets. In December it was announced that the Midwestern retailer was closing 39 stores shortly after Debtwire revealed that the retailer was exploring restructuring. A few weeks later, pharmaceutical drug supplier McKesson Corporation filed a lawsuit alleging that Shopko owed the company $67 million after it “would not commit to any future date on which Shopko would be able to make payment,” according to court documents. By mid-January the retailer filed for Chapter 11, announced additional store closures and obtained $480 million in financing from lenders to continue business operations throughout the bankruptcy process. Walgreens then won 63 stores during an auction of the retailer’s pharmacy assets.The court documents originally filed by McKesson allege that the retailer, “ceased making payments to multiple other vendors,” and “has stopped paying numerous other creditors.” McKesson declined further comment on those allegations.Making and selling bedding has become a nightmare in the U.S. as disruptive material and sales innovations from bed-in-box startups like Casper continue to undermine traditional store-based mattress sales in the U.S. Innovative Mattress Solutions, which runs the Sleep Outfitters, Mattress Warehouse and Mattress King brands, is hardly alone: Ubiquitous retailer Mattress Firm is in the process of shuttering some 700 stores after filing Chapter 11 last fall.IMS has significantly fewer stores — all told its banners operate 142 specialty sleep retail locations, primarily in the southeastern U.S. — and last year contributed less than 2% of the Tempur Sealy’s global net sales. Still, Tempur Sealy CEO Scott Thompson earlier this month called the businesses retail footprint “overextended” and its capital structure “thin,” with neither “designed to effectively respond to the competitive pressures of the recent retail environment.”While legacy businesses in the market count sheep, the disruptors are busy counting sales. Leader Casper started off last year with plans to open its first standalone store and has expanded that to plans for 200 across North America after inking deals with Target and Nordstrom. Rivals Tuft & Needle, Leesa, Nest and Purple have partnered with legacy retailers and Amazon, which itself moved into the space last year with its own affordable and premium mattress options.The first weekend after the new year began, Beauty Brands filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, saying it had entered into an asset purchase agreement with Hilco Merchant Resources for the sale of its operating assets. At the time of the filing, the retailer owed $6.9 million on a secured loan and $11 million in unsecured debt to suppliers and landlords.Just before filing, the retailer had announced the closure of 25 stores, which it plans to liquidate through Chapter 11. The retailer plans to sell the remaining 33, though CEO Caryn Lerner noted at the time that all stores remained open and that the company’s objective was to “emerge from Chapter 11 in a stronger position and move forward as a successful brand.”Among other things, the company pointed to an unsuccessful brand repositioning attempt, which caused it to open 11 new format store locations between 2014 and 2016 and led to significant operating losses as those stores underperformed. The story comes at a time when many beauty retailers are performing well, and startups like Glossier and Birchbox are making ever more ambitious moves into the space.With over 65 years of experience, David’s Bridal was once a leader in the wedding apparel space. Now the retailer is struggling to keep up with a changing industry.The company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on Nov. 19 and announced a restructuring process that includes $60 million in secured financing and a $125 million asset-loan to keep stores open. In a video on the company’s website, CEO Scott Key assured customers that all 300 locations will continue operations and orders will be delivered as promised.Even though David’s Bridal claims to sell one-third of U.S. bridal dresses, the company has faced a steady increase in apparel competition. The casualization of weddings, positioning itself at a mid-range price point and the need to invest in larger digital capabilities has also dimmed the retailer’s effectiveness. “Bridal retail is a difficult segment,” said Raya Sokolyanska, VP senior analyst at Moody’s Corporation, in an interview with Retail Dive. “It was always a tough business to run, but is now tougher.”Sears has been bleeding money and customers for years. Its Chapter 11 filing, when it came, surprised no one, except perhaps by its timing. The company has beaten bankruptcy speculation in the past as former CEO Eddie Lampert (and majority owner) loaned the retailer hundreds of millions out of his hedge fund, ESL Investments. Lampert also kept Sears afloat through asset sales, store closures and thousands of layoffs meant to ease Sears’ bottom line.In 2018 alone, Sears borrowed millions from Lampert’s fund, ESL Investments, closed more than 200 stores, laid off hundreds of corporate employees, refinanced debt, cut a deal over its private label credit card that brought in millions and contemplated a sale of the Kenmore appliance brand and home services unit to Lampert and ESL.But, in the end, it wasn’t enough to keep Sears out of bankruptcy court. When it filed, Sears said it expected to close an additional 142 stores by the end of the year and reorganize around its remaining profitable stores (which numbered at about 400, according to the company’s chief financial officer) and sell them as a going concern. Meanwhile, Lampert’s ESL is in talks with the retailer about a bid for those stores.Mattress Firm (owned by Steinhoff International Holdings) filed for bankruptcy Oct. 5 with a plan to close 700 underperforming stores, 200 of which were slated to close just days after the company filed Chapter 11.In an increasingly competitive market, Mattress Firm had been facing challenges from e-commerce startups like Casper (which have won over customers with lower prices, convenient delivery and playful marketing), not to mention working through the loss of key supplier Tempur-Pedic, which stopped selling at Mattress Firm in 2017 after contract negotiations fell through, and filed a lawsuit in August claiming Mattress Firm was selling “confusingly similar” products to its own. The retailer was also carrying the weight of an 11.2% drop in revenue in fiscal 2017.Mattress Firm entered bankruptcy with a restructuring plan, under which the retailer hopes to shed unprofitable stores and improve its product offering. The company also released projections for profits of $200 million by fiscal 2020, assuming that 40% of the sales it’s losing from closed stores will be recaptured by nearby Mattress Firm locations.Founded in 1891 in San Francisco, Samuels Jewelers in August notched its fourth trip to Chapter 11 in just over 25 years. Now headquartered in Austin, Texas, the retailer runs more than 120 stores in the U.S. as well as an e-commerce site. A couple years after its most recent trip through Chapter 11, in the early 2000s, the jewelry seller was bought out by Indian company Gitanjali Gems, whose chairman has in recent years become the target of a criminal probe in India for allegedly defrauding multiple banks in the country, according to a bankruptcy filing.That was just the latest twist in a harrowing couple of years for Samuels, which has seen declining sales and widening operating losses (to the tune of $14.9 million for its most recent fiscal year). Ahead of filing for Chapter 11, the retailer won an agreement for bankruptcy financing as well as an agreement with liquidation firms Gordon Brothers and Hilco to sell excess inventory in order to pay off debt. Meanwhile, a representative for the company said in court papers that Samuels hopes to sell itself as an operating business during the court process.The owner of the Fallas chain of discount stores suffered financial setbacks from certain underperforming stores, exacerbated by severe weather in various regions, including by Hurricane Maria, resulting in what it called “prolonged, temporary closure of damaged stores and loss of revenue.” Before filing for Chapter 11, the company said it also suffered further financial losses from its acquisition of Conway Stores and from a data breach.CEO Michael Fallas said in a release after filing that the retailer was “historically a profitable company” and was committed to returning to profitability and financial help through the Chapter 11 process. “Our goal is to emerge a reorganized Company poised to compete in an evolving industry so that we can continue to serve the communities where we are rooted,” he added. The company also said it was working with creditors and vendors to hash out a reorganization plan in bankruptcy.Known for its oddball electronics, gifts, travel gear and other assorted doodads, Brookstone has faced the same foot-traffic problems as other mall chains. The company filed for Chapter 11 on Aug. 2 with plans to sell itself and close all 101 remaining mall-based stores in bankruptcy “following continued deterioration of traditional retail mall traffic.”As Brookstone winds down its mall presence, it plans to restructure around its 35 airport stores as well as its e-commerce and wholesale businesses. Brookstone CEO Piau Phang Foo said those three businesses are “operating successfully and should prove attractive to a buyer with the financial resources and vision to carry our company into the future.” To fund it through Chapter 11, Brookstone secured agreements to $30 million in bankruptcy financing from Wells Fargo and Gordon Brothers.Brookstone began as a direct marketer, placing its first advertisement for “hard-to-find-tools” in Popular Mechanics in 1965. After growing a catalog business, Brookstone opened its first brick-and-mortar store in New Hampshire in 1973. In 2014, the retailer was nearly sold in Chapter 11 to the parent of Spencer’s, a fellow seller of unique (and amusingly nonessential) wares. Instead, it went to a joint venture between the China-based firms Sailing Capital and Sanpower Group for $174 million.Since its founding in 1971, the comfort footwear brand Rockport Group has changed hands several times, moving from Reebok to Adidas to New Balance and Berkshire Partners,who in turn sold it to a group of the company’s lenders.After playing for decades in the bruising and competitive footwear space, the company went through a series of supply chain mishaps that wreaked havoc on its balance sheet and operations. Rockport filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy with a plan for private equity firm Charlesbank to take over ownership of Rockport’s global wholesale assets, e-commerce platform and retail operations in Asia and Europe. It would also have the option to take over the company’s North American retail operation and keep open stores it wanted, while using Chapter 11 to close unwanted stores.At the time of filing, Rockport operated eight full-price and 19 outlet stores in the U.S. and had $287 million in debt liabilities.The department store doldrums took their toll on Nine West. The company — which was founded in the 1970s by Jerome Fisher and Vince Camuto, who had the idea of manufacturing shoes on the cheap overseas and selling them in New York at lower prices — made 80% of its sales as a wholesaler. Unfortunately, Nine West made many of those sales to department stores, including Bon-Ton, Sears and Macy’s — one of which is bankrupt, another has been teetering on the edge of financial disaster for years and the other is in relatively healthy shape but still closing stores by the dozens.For years the women’s fashion retailer and wholesaler has been losing market share amid softening apparel sales and competition from e-commerce players. Nine West in 2016 got a reprieve from its lenders in order to help it ride out the holidays in preparation for 2017. Also that year, sources told Bloomberg that restructuring firms had approached Nine West with proposals to reduce its debt. In May last year, the company announced it had retained investment bank Lazard to evaluate a long-term capital structure solutionLast year, the brand’s customer loyalty started to waiver dangerously, according to data from mobile marketing platform inMarket emailed to Retail Dive. Except for a slight rebound in October, loyalty continued to decrease in the third quarter, and has edged down slightly each month, including during the holidays.Nine West entered Chapter 11 with $1.6 billion in debt and a $200 million stalking horse bid from Authentic Brands for its flagship and Bandolino brands. Creditors planned to take over the remaining business, including One Jeanswear, Kasper and Anne Klein apparel brands as well as Nine West’s jewelry business, all of which the company said were profitable and growing. Nine West’s CEO said at the time of filing that it had already removed inventory and vacated almost all of its remaining brick-and-mortar stores.Teen and tween-focused Claire’s Stores calls itself a “girl’s best friend,” with over 100 million ears pierced under its banner, but girls and young women have plenty other options these days. Among them are H&M, Forever 21 and Zara, as well as discount and online players.Trying to free up cash and stem losses, the company closed 166 storesin 2016, a year in which the company posted net income of $53.9 million compared to a net loss of $236.4 million in 2015. For 2017, the company said it expected EBITDA of $212 million, up nearly 13% from 2016 and sales of $1.3 billion, which is roughly flat from the year before.Even as the company showed positive cash flow, it said that much of its cash went to paying debt, making competing with fast fashion, discount and online that much harder. Like many retailers in trouble,private equity ownershipadded to Claire’s Stores’ woes. Apollo Global Management took Claire’s private in 2007 in a $3.1 billion leveraged buyout. The retailer had refinanced some debtto delay interest payments, but it wasn’t enough.The company filed for Chapter 11 March 19with a restructuring plan agreed to by a group of its largest lenders. Under the plan, Claire’s would reduce its overall indebtedness by $1.9 billion, the company said. The plan would also give current lenders a stake in the reorganized retailer through a new equity investment of $250 million. Claire’s said it expects to complete the Chapter 11 process by September and would exit with $150 million in liquidity.This is The Walking Company’s second trip to bankruptcy court in a decade. Founded in 1991, as a retailer of European “comfort shoes,” Walking Company — which includes the FootSmart and Big Dogs Sportswear banners — eventually expanded into malls across the country and broadened its focus to include more shoe types as well as clothing and lifestyle products. In 2008, it filed after a rapid store expansion ran into a massive recession. It emerged from Chapter 11 with its core business significantly improved, and then 10 years later ran into another sector downturn.Leading up to its 2018 filing, the company tried to renegotiate its store lease terms to lighten its rent burdens, but had only limited success in the effort. It also suffered when Wells Fargo significantly devalued the inventory that backed a major loan and when a key vendor stopped supplying its successful private label line.Walking Company entered bankruptcy in March with agreements for new investments and financing, and a clear path out of bankruptcy. Key to its future will be negotiations with landlords in Chapter 11 and, more importantly, making good on the new cash to adapt its model to keep up with customers and secular changes in retail.Bon-Ton Stores, with roots going back to the 19th century, is still tightly connected to its founding family. Once privately held and mainly debt-free, it went public and expanded over the past two decades. Today it has a debt load many see as unsustainable as its sales contract in a troubled department store sector.Bon-Ton entered 2017 under financial pressure, but many analysts thought the company had the liquidity to muddle through the year and into its next debt maturities in 2018. But as the bad news about the company flowed, the bankruptcy chatter grew louder. The retailer’s suppliers reportedly began pressing for tighter terms on shipments to the retailer last fall. In September, the retailer hired AlixPartners for help with its turnaround efforts and began a search for a financial adviser to help with a possible debt restructuring. In bankruptcy court, the retailer disclosed it had also gone looking for a prospective buyer starting in late 2017, but no formal interest materialized.In December, Bon-Ton failed to make a multimillion dollar interest payment, entering into a grace period that eventually lapsed as the company negotiated with its lenders. The retailer filed for Chapter 11 on Feb. 4 with agreements for more than $700 million in bankruptcy financing to keep the lights on. The company won court approval for the new financing soon after — over the objections from some bondholders calling for Bon-Ton to liquidate immediately in bankruptcy, calling the retailer’s prospects for survival in a shrinking department store sector “at best, uncertain, and in reality, unlikely.”The subsidiary of an international beauty retailer, Kiko USA played in a healthy and innovative beauty sector but had hitched its fortunes to malls.As mall traffic and brick-and-mortar sales declined, the makeup seller launched a new line of business selling through Amazon and using its “Fulfillment by Amazon” program. That business, together with Kiko’s own website, was growing in the double digits ahead of the company’s Chapter 11 filing. But physical sales shrank too fast for Kiko to adjust its cost base through lease negotiations. The company filed for bankruptcy protection in January with plans to close all but five of its domestic retail locations by the end of February.Kiko USA’s CEO said in a court filing that the retailer has a strategic plan that focuses on its offerings, remaining stores and e-commerce business.A’gaci’s recent physical expansion was particularly poorly timed — it came just as mall traffic started declining. After building out 21 new stores over the past two years, A’gaci is now looking to close 49 stores — almost 65% of its footprint — in bankruptcy.Along with bad timing, the women’s fashion retailer also suffered from bad luck. The company’s CEO said in a court filing that major hurricanes last year “ravaged” some of the retailer’s most profitable stores. The retailer’s earnings fell by $7.2 million in the past year, and the timing of the earnings hit was also terrible — it came as a major debt maturity loomed in 2018. The hurricanes, earnings hit, overexpansion and problems with a business software system roll out all worked together pushed the company to file for bankruptcy protection in January.Now the retailer, founded in 1971 and boasts, is looking to shrink its physical footprint and focus on its more profitable stores.Founded in 2004, Charming Charlie made a name for itself by organizing accessories and jewelry assortments by color and pricing its products in a “sweet spot” between more upscale retailers like Macy’s and specialty sellers like Claire’s that cater to younger shoppers. It grew into a retailer with more than $400 million in sales. Backed by private equity firms TSG Consumer Partners and Hancock Park Associates, the company has struggled of late to pay off its debt after a period of rapid expansion.Last year, the retailer reportedly explored a debt restructuring after it “failed to establish sufficient scale to compete in a highly fragmented market that has been tested by the rise of internet shopping and rapidly changing consumer tastes,” according to Reuters. The company’s outlook has fallen sharply since then. The retailer plans to shutter nearly one third of its 370 store fleet by the end of the year as it also cuts some corporate staff.The 20-year-old retailer based in Anaheim, CA has over 160 mall and outlet stores, according to the company’s website, but in early November, a lawyer representing Styles For Less told Reuters that some stores have already begun to shutter. It’s not yet clear how many more will need to close as the company restructures its mounting debt. It’s liabilities lie between $10 million and $50 million.Like other teen apparel chains that have found themselves in bankruptcy court this year, Styles for Less has suffered as mall traffic has declined and as logoed T-shirts have fallen out of style. One of the biggest problems ailing these retailers is a lack of differentiation from their competitors and a failure to promote a strong brand identity that aligns with Gen Z.Many saw the company’s mounting debt — a legacy of its acquisition by Kohlbergon Kravis Roberts, Bain Capital Partners and Vornado Realty Trust — as unsustainable, especially in a quickly evolving retail world and toy market. Toys R Us has been trying to compete against mass merchants, who have put pricing pressure on the box retailer, and online players. The company just this summer revamped its website, and it has been struggling for years with declining store sales.In a court document, CEO David Brandon said the company’s debt service payments have been gobbling up around $400 million in cash every year, making it impossible to keep up with modern competition in the toy retail market. If Toys R Us can emerge from bankruptcy with less debt and money to reinvest in its business, the process could mark a turning point.Aerosoles has been trying to find a sweet spot between its reputation for comfort and its appeal as a retailer of affordable footwear to include more fashion-forward options and higher prices. Denise Incandela, who has held executive roles at Saks Fifth Avenue and Ralph Lauren, replaced CEO R. Shawn Neville in April, and said that the Chapter 11 filing will enable the company to improve its financial structure and right-size its retail footprint, in order to refocus its turnaround strategy.Investment firm Palladin Retail Partners added Aerosoles to its stable of retail and apparel companies in 2014: The footwear company has had three chief executives since. With 120 retail locations, the brand had a performance vibe early on. The idea was to be able to walk from home to the subway and work without resorting to wearing one’s sneakers, but the brand’s appeal has faltered of late, and the tough apparel market has taken its toll.Vitamin World has closed 45 underperforming stores since early 2016, when it tapped RCS Real Estate Advisers to review its “above market rents.” That saved the company $2 million in profit, according to court documents. But it wasn’t enough to stave off bankruptcy and, as the retailer’s CEO previously told media, not all landlords would play ball as Vitamin World tried to negotiate rents and leases.Vitamin World Chief Financial Officer Frank Conley said in a court filing that the retailer also suffered “significant supply chain and ingredient availability issues” that hurt sales and crimped liquidity during the transition away from its previous owner, NBTY Inc., a supplement manufacturer. The company owes a total of $14.4 million in accrued interest on secured debt and another $9.5 million on a seller note originating from the company’s 2016 buyout by a private equity company. The retailer’s inventory is valued at around $30 million.Perfumania has been “working diligently to amend its business model, reduce its cost structure, improve supply chain efficiency, optimize marketing, reduce expenses and improve operating results long-term,” according to CEO Michael Katz. In the first quarter of this year, the company closed 43 stores, and its bankruptcy filing is meant to accelerate those efforts, Katz said. The retailer’s total debt, according to its bankruptcy filings, sits at $253.9 million. Meanwhile, sales have been declining — in fiscal 2016, they fell by 13.5% to $468.9 million compared to the prior-year period. Losses, too, have been widening, from 75 cents a share in 2015 to $1.53 a share last year. In its most recently reported quarter, Perfumania saw its amount of cash and cash equivalents fall by 76%.In Ch. 11, the company hopes to not just reduce its expenses but transform into more of a digital retailer, with an emphasis on its e-commerce business and omnichannel initiatives that will enhance and create a more seamless shopping experience.Alfred Angelo Piccione and Edythe Piccione founded the bridal business in Philadelphia in the 1930s and it was later run by their children and based out of Delray Beach, FL. The company recently held 61 stores nationwide, as well as stores in Japan, Spain, the Netherlands, France, the U.K., Canada and Australia. Many of its designs, which included “special occasion” dresses for bridesmaids and others, were sold by more than 1,400 retailers globally.On June 29, Alfred Angelo’s headquarters faced an eviction lawsuit over unpaid rent, according to the South Florida Business Journal, and on July 14 the company posted a notice on its website acknowledging it had filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy, which entails a full liquidation of its assets. Sudden store closures created chaos for patrons who had already ordered gowns and showed up at the shops to find them closed. “As a result, all stores and wholesalers are closed,” according to the company.Southern California retailer True Religion, founded in 2002, once held a respectable reputation for quality, designer denim. But as the athleisure trend took hold and consumer tastes shifted toward yoga pants over the last several years, the jeans maker struggled to retain its once popular business. By 2016, the company became burdened by some $500 million in debt and hired law firm Kirkland & Ellis LLP to explore restructuring options, according to Business of Fashion.Efforts to rejuvenate the business, however, have been fruitless. In February, Moody’s Investors Service pegged the brand as one at risk of filing for bankruptcy protection due to factors like stressed liquidity, weak quantitative credit profiles, challenged competitive positions, sponsor ownership and erratic management structure. The retailer ultimately filed for bankruptcy protection on July 5, signing a restructuring agreement with lenders to erase $350 million in debt, while keeping stores open and growing its digital business, True Religion CEO John Ermatinger, said in a statement.Papaya Clothing was in part a victim of its own success. After opening in 1999, the teen apparel retailer opened some 50 of the 80 stores it now operates during the past six years. From the chief financial officer’s account, Papaya was successful. It brings in about $134 million in sales, boasts a rapid product development timeline and consistently leads its category in sales per square foot of space. But it ran into the broader retail slowdown and faced heady competition from e-commerce, fast fashion off-price retailers. It filed for bankruptcy in June as it faced liquidity issues, in part due to the costs and debt from its rapid expansion.Like Gymboree and rue 21, Papaya hopes to remain in operation. Papaya has asked the court for the ability to exit some 30 leases. The retailer also asked for leeway to honor potentially hundreds of thousands of dollars in outstanding customer discounts, returns and loyalty rewards as it looks to restructure its debt and stay up to date on utility payments and other obligations.Children’s retailer Gymboree filed for Chapter 11 in June, after missing an interest payment on outstanding bonds and ahead of the maturity of loans worth hundreds of millions of dollars. The debt was a legacy of private equity firm Bain Capital’s leveraged buyout of the company in 2010. Adding to the company’s financial woes were suppliers —jittery about the company’s finances and news of then-CEO Mark Breitbard’s departure — demanding stricter payment and shipment terms.Gymboree’s sales had sagged amid declining mall traffic and competition from off-pricers, Target, e-commerce sellers and retailers in its own niche, namely The Children’s Place and Carter’s. Despite these headwinds and financial woes, Gymboree’s creditors see value in the company as a retailer. They’ve agreed to reduce the company’s debt load by $900 million and inject debtor-in-possession capital so Gymboree can keep operating. But the company will certainly shrink, with plans to shut as many as 450 stores in bankruptcy. Meanwhile, the company’s competitors are poised to snatch up any forgone sales as Gymboree closes stores. The main beneficiary is likely to be The Children’s Place, which overlaps broadly with Gymboree stores. Gymboree hopes to emerge from bankruptcy in a matter of months.In April, teen apparel retailer Rue21 began shuttering some 400 stores nationwide, about a third of its fleet, calling it a “difficult but necessary decision.” That left the retailer with about 800 stores and an e-commerce business. But downsizing wasn’t enough. Ultimately, the company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on May 15, entering into agreements with some lenders to reduce debt and provide additional capital in support of its restructuring efforts, with an aim to keep the company alive.Rue21 has been in the midst of a turnaround since an executive suite shake-up last October by private equity owner Apax Partners shortly after credit ratings firm Fitch Ratings warned Rue21 could slip down the slope to bankruptcy. The company replaced General Merchandise Manager Kim Reynolds as well as CEO Bob Fisch, who together had run the company for some 15 years. The retailer’s situation mirrors the challenges that have plagued many mall-based junior apparel retailers — over expansion, declining mall traffic and a lack of turnaround support from private equity ownership.Discount shoe retailer Payless filed for Chapter 11 April 4 that CEO W. Paul Jones called it a “difficult, but necessary, decision” prompted by a challenging retail environment, which he said will only intensify. The company immediately announced plans to close 400 stores as part of an effort to “work to aggressively manage the remaining real estate lease portfolio.” The store closure target doubled more than a month later, with 800 of the 4,400 stores Payless operated as of April. At the time of bankruptcy, Payless also agreed with a majority group of its term loan holders to reduce its debt load by almost 50% as well as its lower annual cash interest costs.Payless, founded in 1956 in Topeka, Kansas, reinvented shoe retail by introducing a no-frills, self-service approach that let it sell at lower prices. But the concept is no longer new and exciting to consumers, as the old-fashioned shoe salesperson is now relegated to department stores (and even Macy’s is phasing those out) and some specialty stores. Payless is also yet another victim of a leveraged buyout, after it was acquired in 2012 by private equity firms Blum Capital and Golden Gate.Gander Mountain filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on March 10 with immediate plans to close 30 stores and offer itself up on the auction block. The outdoor and sporting goods chain, like others that have fallen into bankruptcy this year, had gone through a rapid expansion in the years befor the retail slowdown. Since 2012 the company opened or announced some 60 new stores, and at one point operated 162 locations in 27 states. That was on top of its direct-to-consumer catalog internet business and the Overton’s e-commerce retail unit from Greenville, North Carolina. But the company, like Sports Authority and Eastern Outfitters before it, ran headlong into widening competition in its sector that includes the likes of Dick’s and Cabela’s.On May 1, Camping World Holdings, an Illinois-based network of RV-centric retail locations and outdoor-related services, announced it had won the bankruptcy auction for Gander Mountain and Overton. The sale topped $37 million and included a host of assets, among them real estate leases, intellectual property rights, operating systems and platforms, distribution center equipment, e-commerce businesses, and fixtures and equipment. Shortly after the court approved the sale, Camping World announced it would keep open 70 of Gander Mountain’s 126 then-remaining stores.Founded just over 100 years ago and once known as Richman Gordmans, Omaha, Nebraska-based Gordmans Stores was once a fixture in the Midwest. But the discount department store did not adapt well to changing consumer demand for e-commerce, only launching a website in 2015. Gordmans was purchased by private equity firm Sun Capital in 2008 and expanded its store fleet rapidly, mirroring the expansion of department stores like J.C. Penney and Macy’s at the time.In recent years, Gordman’s has been plagued by declining foot traffic and plummeting sales. Sales fell 75% in the past year alone, and in January, the company announced an unspecified number of job cuts amid “the current sluggish retail environment.” In March, the company ran 106 stores in 62 markets and 22 states and carried a debt load of about $85 million.That month, speculation of an imminent bankruptcy caught wind, and the retailer eventually filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection mid-March, also announcing a slew of job cuts. Just weeks later, ex-Gordmans CEO (and the founder’s great-grandson) Jeff Gordman challenged regional department store chain Stage Stores in a bid to regain control of his family company. Ultimately, Stage Stores won the rights to Gordmans intellectual property, about 50 store leases, a distribution center and inventory for an undisclosed amount.Once a star of niche retail and a veritable nerd mecca, the nearly 100-year-old company is now on its second bankruptcy and the regular butt of internet jokes about its sad liquidation sales. On March 8 RadioShack filed for Chapter 11, again, after having emerged from bankruptcy two years ago as a private company through a sale to hedge fund Standard General.With the March filing came plans to close 200 stores and to evaluate its options for the remaining 1,300. CEO Dene Rogers blamed poor performance of mobility sales for thwarting further progress for the retailer. RadioShack also failed to find any way to dent the increasing dominance of Amazon, which accounted for a whopping 90% of the $5.6 billion growth in U.S. consumer electronics in 2015, according to Deutsche Bank. At the time of the March bankruptcy announcement, RadioShack was reported to be in talks with Sprint, which helps run about a third of its brick-and-mortar operations in co-branded stores, to evaluate its options for stores.Aside from booksellers, electronics retailers were some of the most notable victims to be wiped out by Amazon’s e-commerce dominance. Amazon accounted for a whopping 90% of the $5.6 billion growth in consumer electronics sales posted nationwide in 2015, according to a note last year from Deutsche Bank analysts, and Hhgregg was unable to face down the competition.The electronics, home furnishings and appliance retailer, founded in Indiana in 1955, became a multi-regional chain in the late 20th century. As competition heated up in the space, from Amazon as well as Best Buy, Sears and J.C. Penney, CEO Robert Riesbeck took measures in 2016 to shake up the company’s senior management, expand its free delivery options, boost digital efforts and streamline the supply chain. On March 3 2017, the retailer announced a 40% reduction in its store fleet, some 88 underperforming stores and three distribution centers, resulting in 1,500 job cuts. News of the turnaround came amid reports of an imminent bankruptcy filing, which was ultimately filed three days later. At the time, Hhgregg said it had lined up an anonymous buyer (which appeared to be the retailer’s ad agency Zimmerman Advertising). But by the end of March, the company acknowledged the deal had collapsed. A month later, the retailer threw in the towel, receiving court approval for a plan to close its remaining 220 stores and liquidate its assets.BCBG Max Azria Group had been floundering for years leading up to its bankruptcy filing on March 1. The brand portfolio struggled to win a following and maintain sales while the company struggled under a debt load that by 2013 had risen to $685 million. Longtime investor Guggenheim Partners was responsible for $475 million of that. In 2015, BCBG received $135 million from investors to help restructure that debt, but problems persisted. In January 2017, the company hired business management consultant AlixPartners to tackle the challenge. By the beginning of New York Fashion Week in February 2017, BCBG, a 20-year veteran of the show, was making headlines for bankruptcy buzz rather than its clothing.On June 9 BCBG announced that two companies in a stalking horse bid — Marquee Brands and Global Brands Group Holding Ltd. — would buy for an undisclosed amount most of its assets in bankruptcy. Per the plan, Marquee would acquire the intellectual property of the flagship BCBG brand, and Global Brands would acquire assets associated with the operation of the BCBG business. Many saw the outcome as the most hopeful in the rash of recent retail bankruptcies, with the long-respected BCBG Max Azria brand kept alive by its buyers.Grand Forks, North Dakota-based Vanity was founded as a private company in the 1950s selling apparel and accessories for young women. By 2013, its store fleet had grown to 170 stores in 26 states. But the good times wouldn’t last.By March 2017, the mall-based specialty apparel retailer succumbed to declining foot traffic and changing consumer demands, and began advertising a “going out of business” sale. That month it filed to reorganize under bankruptcy protection with a plan to shutter all of its stores. While a restructure is still pending, its e-commerce website is currently disabled although it promises shoppers, “We’ll be back soon!” Whether it will, remains to be seen.Eastern Mountain Sports, founded in 1967 in Massachusetts by two climbers, and Connecticut-based discount retailer Bob’s Stores were once popular sellers of outdoor apparel and gear in the Northeast. While the companies enjoyed a steady period of growth and profitability, financial stability did not last.In 2016, Eastern Outfitters’ previous owner, Vestis Retail Group, shuttered regional sports retailer Sport Chalet in order to focus on the Bob’s and Eastern Mountain Sports operations. It ultimately sold those retailers to Versa Capital Management, which restructured the companies under the parent company Easter Outfitters LLC at the time.Fierce competition in the sporting goods space and private equity interest felled the company, which ultimately filed for bankruptcy after less than a year of Versa ownership. U.K. sports retailer Sports Direct emerged as a stalking horse bidder and in mid-April received the approval of the Delaware Bankruptcy Court to acquire certain assets of Eastern Outfitters LLC, including the businesses of Bob’s Stores and Eastern Mountain Sports for $101 million in cash, giving the British retailer a footprint in U.S. brick-and-mortar retail and a platform from which to grow U.S. online sales.Wet Seal has been flopping around on jagged rocks for well over a decade, its fate made slippery by the fickle predilections of its target demographic and the arrival of fast fashion. While its surf-and-sun aesthetic was once embraced by American teens in the early 2000’s, all that changed and between 2013-2015 the retailer lost more than $150 million and defaulted on $27 million in senior convertible notes. Nearly 340 stores were shuttered shortly thereafter in its first Chapter 11 filing in 2015. Through bankruptcy, the retailer was bought by private equity firm Versa for $7.5 million in cash.As logoed-T-shirts and mall hangouts fell out of fashion, Wet Seal failed to differentiate from similarly struggling rivals - Abercrombie & Fitch, Hollister and Aeropostale - and a turnaround stalled. Wet Seal was given a second life when it emerged as a private company with the aid of of Versa. But the private equity demands placed on the company led it into even deeper water, analysts told Retail Dive. Unable to find a buyer or draw in new capital, teen apparel retailer Wet Seal filed for bankruptcy protection again on Feb. 2.“This isn’t goodbye…” The Limited promised its customers as it shuttered some 250 remaining stores in January, just a few weeks before filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on Jan. 17. But without a physical presence, it was essentially goodbye for the women’s apparel retailer. It closed out 2016 as a shadow of its former self, beset by falling traffic and offering styles that can also be found at rivals like Loft and at department stores.As it publicly planned to restructure, the retailer was missing key top executives. CEO Diane Ellis left to become president of women’s apparel brand Chico’s in October after less than two months in that position. John Buell, who was elevated from his CFO role to interim CEO, abandoned ship in late December. Ironically, The Limited ultimately fell victim to the fast fashion philosophies it helped pioneer. “With Limited, one of the bigger challenges for them was the fast fashion industry and how quickly the fashion came into the marketplace,” Shelley Kohan, vice president of retail consulting at store analytics firm RetailNext, told Retail Dive. With a $26.8 million bid, private equity firm Sycamore Partners snapped up The Limited’s intellectual property, including its e-commerce business in late February, joining a portfolio that includes Belk department stores, Hot Topic, Nine West and Talbots.Get the free daily newsletter read by industry expertsThe free newsletter covering the top industry headlinesSIGN-UP FOR RETAILWIRE NEWSLETTERS! DON’T MISS OUT!Overstock.com had a challenging 2022, but it could have been worse.The online furniture and home goods retailer reported a 30 percent year-over-year revenue decrease and a net loss of $35 million.“2022 was a really difficult time because so many in our industry had excess inventory and were in the process of liquidating it. That put real pressure on pricing downward,” Overstock CEO Jonathan Johnson told RetailWire in an interview yesterday.Mr. Johnson said that when rivals lowered prices, it put more of them in the same “smart value space” where Overstock operates. “It meant that we had to lower prices to be with them and the delta in the price comparison got smaller. Our smart value proposition may not have been as obvious to our customer,” he said.Overstock expects its rivals’ inventory rationalization efforts to be complete by midyear, bringing a greater degree of pricing sanity back to the market. It is in this space that Mr. Johnson expects Overstock to shine.The Overstock CEO pointed to his company’s understanding of its target customers as an organizational strength.“The savvy shopper wants the best quality product for the money she’s willing to spend,” said Mr. Johnson “She may be willing to spend a lot. She may not want to spend a lot. She wants the most she can get for her dollar. We think that fair value is a place where we play and Wayfair doesn’t traditionally.”Mr. Johnson said the other customer Overstock competes for is the reluctant “refresher.” This is someone “who doesn’t particularly like to shop, and when she shops, she knows what she wants. For her, we need product availability and to make her shopping experience easy from first browsing to post-purchase.”Overstock’s CEO sees a competitive advantage for his company in its dropship network of about 2,600 suppliers. The system makes it easier to safeguard supplies with multiple patio furniture suppliers, for example. It also protects Overstock’s margins.“Those flush with inventory liquidated it and hurt their margins,” he said. “Because we don’t own it, we can maintain our margins. And if the price goes down, we’ve negotiated a first cost concession from one of our partners. And that’s why come hell or high water, we’re at 20 to 23 percent gross margin.”DISCUSSION QUESTIONS: How do you see Overstock.com positioned against its rivals in the furniture and home goods space for 2023? What is your evaluation of Overstock’s inventory-free dropship business model?
5 Comments on "Overstock.com’s dropship model is margin-solid ‘come hell or high water’"                    
                    You must be logged in to post a comment.                
                    You must be logged in to post a comment.                Prediction: The boast about maintaining gross margin between 20 percent and 23 percent, “come hell or high water”, will not age well. A 30 percent YOY revenue decrease means that customers found a lot of other avenues for finding value product. Some of those avenues may dry up, but if gross margins are so easy, then rebuilding the revenue seems like the priority.My first reaction is that Mr. Johnson is a CEO who speaks of realities, not hype. What a pleasant surprise.I like this business model. Assuming Overstock.com has built good relations with its partners, Overstock.com becomes a hero to the manufacturers for solving overstock issues. They deliver great prices to the customers. And by controlling the delivery process, they have expertise beyond what the partners could execute on their own.The discount furniture space is very competitive and when competitors slash prices to liquidate excess inventory it squeezes everyone’s margins. Overstock’s increased use of drop-ship to reduce inventory risk is a smart strategy that will help protect margins. Excess inventory in any retail segment is an extremely costly problem and drop-ship is becoming more common and appealing for retailers.The business started rebranding in early 2011 as “O.co” to simplify and unify its international operations, but interrupted this effort a few months later, citing consumer confusion over the new name, which utilized a Colombian country domain.https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Overstock.comThis is what many of us in the Bay Area know about them, as at the time they had naming rights to the Coliseum, and, suffice it to say, it left an impression of “not quite knowing what they’re doing.”  I’m not sure that impression has been shaken (nor am I sure it should be).Inventory-free businesses have plusses and minuses — there’s a reason, after all, why most businesses carry one — and I won’t venture a guess as to which one will win out here.  As for the margin boast: it’s not hard to maintain margin if you have no concerns about how much you sell … actually making money is a harder trick to pull off.The best merchants can manage margin with highly managed inventory. No inventory is more highly managed than drop ship.  The challenge is maintaining revenue if the manufacturer has also tightened their inventory turn making availability of the highly desired product very limited.  Nice to have the margin, but if the revenue isn’t there, neither are the profit $.  It’s always a dance.Do you agree that Overstock’s dropship business model gives it a competitive advantage over other furniture and home goods retailers?View Results Get access to essential strategic content, in-depth reports, industry intelligence, and exclusive data.Get access to essential strategic content, in-depth reports, industry intelligence, and exclusive data.Get access to essential strategic content, in-depth reports, industry intelligence, and exclusive data.Get access to essential strategic content, in-depth reports, industry intelligence, and exclusive data.Sign Into Digital Commerce 360




 


Forgot your password?
Home furnishings giant Wayfair Inc. reported a drop in sales for its third quarter and a growing net loss.Total net revenue dropped 9.0% year over year to $2.84 billion for the third quarter ended Sept. 30. That’s down from $3.12 billion in Q3 2021.Wayfair again reported a net loss of $286 million, much higher than its loss of $78 million in Q3 2021. Wayfair is No. 7 in the 2022 Digital Commerce 360 Top 1000.Although Wayfair turned a profit for a few quarters a few years ago, the home furnishings giant emphasized cost-saving measures to again return to profitability on its call with investors, according to a SeekingAlpha transcript.One of the main ways Wayfair said it is reducing costs is via personnel reductions. In August, Wayfair eliminated 900 corporate job to “reduce redundancies and remove excess management layers,” CEO Niraj Shah said. In addition, it is also reducing “third-party labor,” such as contractors and consultants.Other initiatives include returns monetization, scam reduction, incident prevention and logistics optimization, Shah said.For example, when a shopper returns a product, Wayfair is looking to improve how it resells that product after it is returned.“We see an opportunity to improve the accuracy of our grading to increase open box sales through platform and pricing improvements, and the decreased shipping expenses by changing how we manage logistics,” Shah said. “This initiative alone should result in tens of millions of dollars of savings.”
Furniture retailer Floyd launches resale program for returns During the pandemic, many shoppers spent their discretionary dollars in the home goods sector, and Wayfair and other home retailers benefited with booming sales. Now, in 2022, Wayfair is struggling to grow on top of those large gains from the past few years. Digital Commerce 360 projects the top online retailers in the houseware/home furnishing category will collectively decrease sales 2.3% in 2022 compared with 2021. This comes after the category grew 10.2% in 2021 and 48.2% in 2020, according to Digital Commerce 360 estimates on the housewares/home furnishings retailers in the Top 2000.In addition, consumers are being more judicious with their dollars and are concerned about inflation, Shah said. These factors are impacting Wayfair’s sales and how it is looking to grow sales.“While interest in the broad home category remains, we are seeing shoppers being more deliberate with their spending patterns as they seek out great value and wait for promotions,” Shah said.“As a result, promotional activity across the industry remains high and customers are responding very positively,” Shah added.For example, Wayfair held its annual sale “Way Day” for a second time in 2022 to drum up sales. The event was a “success,” and worked given the current market conditions, Shah said. But Wayfair does not plan to typically have two Way Day sales within one year in future years.“There’s excess inventory and customers are — even though they have plenty of money — they’re a little more sitting on the sidelines,” Shah said. “And that’s kind of a reflection of when we look at the customer sentiment. What you do in those environments is you flex out the promotional kind of calendar, and it works well. But what you don’t do is you don’t keep it there forever.”Overall, Wayfair says it expects the costs savings to be apparent in Q4 and holiday sales to increase in the high single-digit range.“In just a few weeks from now, we’ll get to the traditional Cyber 5 tentpole events,” Shah said. “Each of these promotions is an opportunity to provide value to our customers and our suppliers. Importantly, without compromising our gross margins, given our inventory light mode.”“We continue to see customers respond to promotional events in a positive way and are optimistic for what the holiday season will hold this year,” added Kate Gulliver, chief financial officer and chief administrative officer.Rapid eCommerce Growth, Inventory Not Required - Lessons from Canada's Largest Book & Gift RetailerPercentage changes may not align exactly with dollar figures due to rounding.Stay on top of the latest developments in the ecommerce industry. Sign up for a complimentary subscription to Digital Commerce 360 Retail News.Follow us on LinkedIn, Twitter and Facebook. Be the first to know when Digital Commerce 360 publishes news content.More on ThisIn This ArticleCompaniesIndustriesTopicsRelated Stories
Wayfair cites economic uncertainty in 90-day hiring freeze 
Wayfair’s 2021 sales dip year over year, but increase 50% compared with 2019 
Inflation will shape the 2022 holiday season 
						Copyright © 2022 Digital Commerce 360 | Vertical Web Media LLC					
				Copyright © 2022 Digital Commerce 360 | Vertical Web Media LLC			This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.https://www.barrons.com/articles/what-to-know-today-450f39c5Investors will be kept busy this week digesting a raft of upcoming economic indicators with a particular focus on what they mean for the Federal Reserve and the future path of interest rates.Even though it’s at the end of the week, the Fed’s preferred inflation metric is the place to start.Already a member?
          
            Sign In
          
Investors will be kept busy this week digesting a raft of upcoming economic indicators with a particular focus on what they mean for the Federal Reserve and the future path of interest rates.An error has occurred, please try again later.Thank youThis article has been sent toCopyright ©2023 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights ReservedThis copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by our Subscriber Agreement and by copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact Dow Jones Reprints at 1-800-843-0008 or visit www.djreprints.com.Founded in 1993 by brothers Tom and David Gardner, The Motley Fool helps millions of people attain financial freedom through our website, podcasts, books, newspaper column, radio show, and premium investing services.Founded in 1993 by brothers Tom and David Gardner, The Motley Fool helps millions of people attain financial freedom through our website, podcasts, books, newspaper column, radio show, and premium investing services.You’re reading a free article with opinions that may differ from The Motley Fool’s Premium Investing Services. Become a Motley Fool member today to get instant access to our top analyst recommendations, in-depth research, investing resources, and more. Learn MoreWall Street walked away from both Wayfair (W -6.07%) and Target (TGT -1.75%) stocks in 2022. The two retailers were hit hard by a surprise stampede away from consumer spending, and they are suffering for it. Sales trends are down and the prospects for weaker earnings appear to extend well into 2023.The good news is that these previous Wall Street darlings are now much cheaper thanks to that short-term pessimism. With those low expectations in mind, let's look at which retailer would make the better purchase heading into a rocky 2023 fiscal year.Both companies were caught by surprise when consumers abandoned home furnishing and e-commerce spending in 2022 after having embraced those niches in earlier phases of the pandemic. Wayfair and Target shareholders endured several rounds of declining growth forecasts for the year, along with far weaker profitability due to price cuts aimed at clearing excess inventory.Yet Wayfair is in a much worse position, mainly because of its more focused portfolio. Sales fell 9% in the most recent quarter as its active customer base plunged by 23%.Target, on the other hand, managed modest growth in the third quarter on top of big gains in the prior year. The retailer achieved higher customer traffic, too.Target remains profitable as well, even though profitability is well below what investors have come to expect from the company. Operating profit margin was 4% this past quarter, compared to Wayfair's significant losses.There's another good reason that Wayfair's stock has fallen so much more from its pandemic high. The e-commerce specialist raced to $14 billion of annual sales with help from soaring demand for home furnishings and digital shopping in 2021. But its 2022 sales are on track to mark a second straight annual decline, likely landing at $12.1 billion, according to Wall Street pros.Target's fall was more gradual and appears more like a temporary slump. Yes, revenue and profit margins were down in 2022. But the retailer is growing revenue and market share in key areas outside of home furnishings, such as apparel and beauty care. Its modest profitability rebound in Q3 might mark the end of its earnings slide, too, whereas Wayfair investors might have to wait several quarters before seeing concrete evidence of a return to profits.As you might expect, investors are paying a much bigger discount on Wayfair's stock given its worse operating trends and cloudier path back to growth. Wayfair is valued at just 0.3 times annual sales, or about half of Target's valuation. Walmart, for context, is valued at 0.66 times sales. Chewy, a growing and profitable online retailer, is valued at 1.7 times the past year's sales.Wayfair doesn't look especially tempting at that discounted price. Sure, its retailing niche has a bright long-term future, and earnings will start rebounding once inventory levels calibrate better with demand. But the aggressive pace at which Wayfair has been losing customers, combined with its ballooning net losses, means there might be more bad surprises ahead for shareholders into 2023.Target, on the other hand, is diversified, profitable, and pays a dividend that has increased for more than 50 consecutive years. Those assets make it an easy stock to own even through what could be a worsening period for consumer spending patterns ahead.Demitri Kalogeropoulos has no position in any of the stocks mentioned. The Motley Fool has positions in and recommends Chewy, Target, and Walmart. The Motley Fool recommends Wayfair. The Motley Fool has a disclosure policy.*Average returns of all recommendations since inception. Cost basis and return based on previous market day close.
Invest better with The Motley Fool. Get stock recommendations, portfolio guidance, and more from The Motley Fool's premium services.
Making the world smarter, happier, and richer.Market data powered by Xignite.
This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by
our Subscriber Agreement and by copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact
Dow Jones Reprints at 1-800-843-0008 or visit www.djreprints.com.
https://www.wsj.com/articles/wayfair-loses-its-way-11651764631Listen to article(2 minutes)Investors in Wayfair are getting hit by a double whammy.The online furniture seller already was dealing with sales declines as consumers turned their attention from online shopping to in-person stores. Now, the company must also contend with slowing general demand for furnishings and other big-ticket items. In the first quarter, furniture sellers saw revenue grow 2.9% from a year earlier, a substantial slowdown from the 10%-plus year-over-year growth rate logged in the two preceding quarters, according to the U.S. Census Bureau. Big-ticket items in general are a tougher sell these days; stores selling electronics and appliances actually recorded a 3.3% decline in the first quarter, even as sales at supermarkets and clothing stores grew at healthy paces of 9.1% and 16.7%, respectively.1 hour agoLive Coverage2 hours ago1 hour agoLive Coverage2 hours ago41 mins ago1 hour ago5 hours ago9 hours ago11 hours ago7 hours agoContinue reading your article witha WSJ subscriptionAlready a member? Sign InWSJ MembershipCustomer ServiceTools & FeaturesAdsMoreDow Jones ProductsWSJ MembershipCustomer ServiceTools & FeaturesAdsMoreCopyright ©2023 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by
our Subscriber Agreement and by copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact
Dow Jones Reprints at 1-800-843-0008 or visit www.djreprints.com.
Wayfair Inc (NYSE:W) Q3 2022 Results Conference Call November 3, 2022 8:00 AM ETCompany ParticipantsJames Lamb - Head of Investor RelationsNiraj Shah - Co-Founder, Co-Chairman, President and CEOKate Gulliver - Chief Financial Officer and Chief Administrative OfficerConference Call ParticipantsBrian Nagel - OppenheimerSteven Forbes - Guggenheim SecuritiesJonathan Matuszewski - JefferiesMaria Ripps - CanaccordAlexandra Staiger - Goldman SachsAnna Andreeva - NeedhamJohn Blackledge - CowenOperatorGood day, and welcome to the Wayfair Third Quarter 2022 Earnings Release Conference Call. Please note, today's conference is being recorded. All lines have been placed on mute to prevent any background noise. After the speakers remarks there will be a question and answer session. [Operator Instructions].At this time, I will turn the conference over to James Lamb, Head of Investor Relations.Mr. Lamb, you may begin your conference.James LambGood morning, and thank you for joining us. Today, we will review our third quarter 2022 results. With me are Niraj Shah, Co-Founder, Chief Executive Officer and Co-Chairman; Steve Conine, Co-Founder and Co-Chairman; and Kate Gulliver, Chief Financial Officer and Chief Administrative Officer. We will all be available for Q&A following today's prepared remarks.I would like to remind you that we will make forward-looking statements during this call regarding future events and financial performance, including guidance for the fourth quarter of 2022. We cannot guarantee that any forward-looking statements will be accurate, although we believe that we have been reasonable in our expectations and assumptions.Our 10-K for 2021, our 10-Q for this quarter and our subsequent SEC filings identify certain factors that could cause the company's actual results to differ materially from those projected in any forward-looking statements made today. Except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any of these statements, whether as a result of any new information, future events or otherwise.Also, please note that during this call, we will discuss certain non-GAAP financial measures as we review the company's performance, including adjusted EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA margin and free cash flow. These non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered replacements for and should be read together with GAAP results. Please refer to the Investor Relations section of our website to obtain a copy of our earnings release and investor presentation, which contain descriptions of our non-GAAP financial measures and reconciliations of non-GAAP measures to the nearest comparable GAAP measures.This call is being recorded, and a webcast will be available for replay on our IR website.I would now like to turn the call over to Niraj.Niraj ShahThank you, James, and good morning, everyone. We're glad to reconnect with you today to share the details of Wayfair's third quarter results.This last August marked our 20th anniversary. It was in the summer of 2002 that Steve and I first started this business out of a nursery and Steve's home. We were still nearly a decade away from adopting the Wayfair name at that point, but since the beginning, we've had a vision of creating a premier online shopping destination for the home. We've got big and bold every step along the way, and for nearly a decade, we were able to self-fund our growth as we reinvested operating profits back into the business.In 2011, we rebranded as Wayfair, and for the first time, raised outside capital as we look to scale up our growth. In the decade since, we've grown the business by nearly twentyfold and made meaningful investments in building out our catalog, customer file, geographic presence, logistics platform and more.With the size and scale we've achieved, we are now in a position where we can operate the business for both profitability and growth and are well on our way to returning to a state of self-funding once more.Last quarter, we talked about controlling the controllables and orienting Wayfair in this environment around three key principles: driving cost efficiency, nailing the basics and earning customer and supplier loyalty every day. Kate and I will talk through what we're doing on each of these fronts, and I want to begin at the top.When we spoke in August, we framed what our path to profitability would look like and told you that there would be more detail to come in the not-too-distant future. You saw the first evidence a couple of weeks later as we made the decision to eliminate nearly 900 corporate roles across the organization. Our goal here was to reduce redundancies and remove excess management layers as part of an organization-wide effort to streamline our operations.At the same time, we talked about additional reductions coming from our spend on third-party labor. These two components represent just one set of actions in the cost efficiency that we are executing. Simultaneously, we kicked off a separate set that involves operational initiatives such as returns monetization, scam reduction, incident prevention, logistics optimization and more.Let me provide just one example by further illustrating returns monetization. When we process a return today, there are complexities involved with the cost to send the product back and how we can merchandise and resell it after the return. We see an opportunity to improve the accuracy of our grading to increase open box sales through platform and pricing improvements, and the decreased shipping expenses by changing how we manage logistics. This initiative alone should result in tens of millions of dollars of savings and is one of numerous operational improvements we are working on.Altogether, we expect the actions we've taken so far to drive over $500 million of savings in our P&L. And as you will hear from Kate shortly, there is more coming.Our goal across the board remains the same as it has been for most of the year. Returning to adjusted EBITDA breakeven quickly in 2023 before targeting positive free cash flow shortly thereafter. From there, we will drive towards a mid-single-digit adjusted EBITDA margin level that we will philosophically treat as a lower bound of profitability for the business. As we discussed last quarter, this threshold will allow us to cover off other costs, such as stock-based compensation as well as CapEx associated with logistics investments and capitalized software.As we look to the future, this foundation will enable us to not only drive continued investment into the big and bold ideas that we have planned for Wayfair's next 20 years, but also deliver profitability in a consistent manner.I want to turn now to the notion of nailing the basics, which means showcasing products that interest the customer, providing a great experience on the site and delivering perfect orders that arrive quickly. Key and these commitments are elements such as assortment, availability and speed of delivery, all of which have improved significantly from where we were a year ago. In particular, several speed metrics reached records in Q3, including days to deliver and speed batch penetration.Another part of in the basics is ensuring we have a clear and relevant promotional calendar to engage our shoppers, which is especially important now given what we are seeing in the consumer environment. Inflation persists quite broadly and with spending pressure across the spectrum of discretionary goods we continue to see shoppers being very discerning about where their next dollars are going. For much of the summer months, that discretionary spend shifted from goods to services, with pressure felt across a wide array of retail sectors, including ours. While interest in the broad home category remains, we are seeing shoppers being more deliberate with their spending patterns as they seek out great value and wait for promotions.As a result, promotional activity across the industry remains high and customers are responding very positively. To support our suppliers, we have put together a very strong fall calendar of events. Last week, we ran a successful second Way Day, which came right on the back of our 5 days of deals event. And in just a few weeks from now, we'll get to the traditional Cyber 5 tentpole events. Each of these promotions is an opportunity to provide value to our customers and our suppliers. Importantly, without compromising our gross margins, given our inventory light model.In today's environment, it is more important than ever for us to remain focused on our next key principle, driving customer and supplier loyalty.So let me give you a few examples of how we're doing this. One of the biggest factors in driving customer loyalty is having a great experience of all stages of the shopping journey. Even after the order has been delivered. To do this, we have made an effort to equip our service professionals with an even wider toolkit of solutions to make things right for our shoppers if as occasionally happens and issue arises. These enhancements are generating a very strong response. In fact, over the last handful of months, we've seen repeat rates among customers who report an issue actually match repeat rates of customers who do not.Our relentless focus on creating the best possible shopping experience is a key enabler of earning customer loyalty, and we're pleased to see these efforts validated by internal data, as well as external accolades. We're honored to share that our customer service team has been recognized by Newsweek and their Best In Customer Service 2023 rankings.We also know our customers care about the environment as do we. And we are continuing to innovate with programs to address sustainability. On October 20, we launched our Shop Sustainably program, Wayfair's third-party certified sustainable product offering. We now host the largest number of third-party sustainability certifications in the home industry as well as a refreshed set of options to filter for attributes like water efficiency, fair trade and more. We're very proud of Shop Sustainably because doing the right thing for our communities and our customers isn't a function of whether the economy is good or bad, but it's something we think of as our responsibility.On the other side of the loyalty equation, we have our suppliers. Since earlier this year, we've been encouraging suppliers to lean into CastleGate, and we've seen continued strong momentum. CastleGate drives multiple advantages for suppliers, faster conversion through quick delivery, lower retail prices due to ship cost savings, better visibility on site, reduced damage rates and more. After the supply chain shortages of last year, suppliers are reengaging, and CastleGate penetration is now back to 25% of volume in the U.S. and climbing. The benefits that CastleGate provides to suppliers result in tangible value to customers as well as creating a positive flywheel that will further drive loyalty from both groups into the future.I want to wrap up by returning to where we led off on the first of our key principles, cost efficiency. We are, as a management team, and as an organization, universally focused on taking the steps needed to reach adjusted EBITDA and cash flow neutrality in short order. We have taken a hard look at our cost structure holistically to identify areas of improvement and take action aggressively. Our execution against these initiatives is thoughtful and deliberate to ensure that we can make progress towards our profitability targets, without compromising the potential in front of us.I will reiterate it once more, to be clear. We intend to reach adjusted EBITDA breakeven independent of what the macro brings our way. And from there, to move forward to our mid-single-digit margin target, which will allow us to cover our expense base while at the same time funding our future growth. Over our 20-year history, we've seen several economic cycles. One thing that Steve and I have learned is that moments like this present an opportunity to set ourselves up for continued success as a category leader.One irony is that this is when we're at our best. We built this business with no outside capital and be very well-funded competitors. We know how to win by being both lean and focused.Thank you. And now I'm excited to turn it over to Kate for a review of our financials.Kate GulliverThanks, Niraj, and good morning, everyone. Before I dive into third quarter results, I want to take a moment to emphasize the point that you've just made. The key principles of cost efficiency, nailing the basics and earning customer and supplier loyalty has become driving tenets across our organization. In particular, cost efficiency is a mandate to put each dollar of spend under close scrutiny. We started by closely examining our operating expenses related to headcount across two dimensions: employees and third-party labor like contractors and consultants, with savings that accrue primarily within the SOT G&A line. These programs are already delivering meaningful savings beginning in Q4.Concurrently, we've been driving a myriad of operational cost savings that will primarily benefit the cost of goods sold line. Several of these initiatives represent areas of cost discipline that were forced to the back burner given the frenzy of the COVID impacted period. Now is the right time to reengage across a series of best practices with savings that will build over 2023. Combined, we are in a motion on a set of actions that represent annualized cost savings of approximately $500 million, of which roughly 60% is related to headcount and third-party labor costs, and 40% from operational initiatives.This magnitude is greater than our anticipated adjusted EBITDA losses this year, but we are not finished. In tandem, we are currently actioning on additional savings of several hundred million dollars that we will provide details on during our next call.Turning now to our third quarter results. As you saw in the press release, Q3 total net revenue was $2.8 billion, a 9% year-over-year decline and a 14% sequential decline from the second quarter. This is largely in line with the quarter-to-date performance that we had previewed in early August. And as we noted at that time, a weakening macro environment contributed to a break from the typical seasonal pattern in which we would expect revenue to be sequentially flat from the second to the third quarter.As it has for some time now, net revenue in the U.S. business outperformed the aggregate at a negative 6% year-over-year decline, while our international markets, especially in Europe, continue to be disproportionately impacted by macro headwinds and geopolitical uncertainty. While the operating environment incrementally worsened over the course of Q3, we continue to see customers respond to promotional events in a positive way and are optimistic for what the holiday season will hold this year.I'll now move further down the P&L. As I do, please note that I'll be referencing the remaining financials on a non-GAAP basis, which includes depreciation and amortization but excludes stock-based compensation, related taxes and other adjustments. I will use the same non-GAAP basis when discussing our outlook as well.The benefits of CastleGate adoption are most visible on our gross margin line, which climbed nicely again in Q3 to 29.1%. The combination of faster CastleGate penetration and further relief on transportation costs, some of which we have previously absorbed rather than passed on to customers, all helped us to exceed our guided range of 27% to 28%. Niraj mentioned it briefly earlier, but we're often asked by investors how promotional intensity impacts our margin structure, and this simple answer is not by much. As suppliers on the site choose to lean in with shopper wholesales, we pass those savings on to the end customer. Our margins stay resilient while also ensuring that our retail prices stay competitive across the landscape.Advertising as a percentage of net revenue came in at 12.4% for the third quarter, above our guided range. There continue to be various mix effects impacting ACNR. We went into great detail about these last quarter, and much of what we saw in Q3 reflected similar trends to Q2 where, once again, higher paid versus free traffic is a temporary headwind to this metric.We continue to monitor our paid marketing spend very closely to ensure that we remain within our ROI and payback parameters across each channel. Customer service and merchant fees were 5.2% of net revenue, just above our guided range. We saw some inflation in headcount across this line item earlier in the quarter. And while we made adjustments to that base subsequently, it still had an impact on the dollar cost for Q3. We expect to see this return closer to historical levels in the fourth quarter.Finally, our selling, operations, technology and G&A expenses totaled $543 million, just under our guided range. With the reduction towards the end of August, a small portion of the savings began to accrue over the remainder of the quarter. And as we'll discuss shortly, you should expect to see a more fully realized set of savings in Q4.All combined, our Q3 adjusted EBITDA came in at a negative $124 million or a negative 4% of net revenue, in line with our guided range. We ended the quarter with $1.3 billion of cash and highly liquid investments. Net cash from operations was a negative $431 million, and capital expenditures totaled $107 million below our guidance as our cost-cutting initiatives started to play out, leading to free cash flow of negative $538 million for Q3.As many of you know, we typically enjoy a net working capital benefit when revenue grows sequentially due to the favorable timing differences between receivables and payables, inherent in our business model. However, this dynamic inverts and periods of sequentially declining revenue like we saw in Q3, resulting in a cash outflow. In fact, more than half of the loss in cash flow from operations this quarter was due to a drag from net working capital.With Q4 historically representing a sequential uptick in revenue, we would expect our net working capital to once again positively contribute to cash flow. As many of you saw, in September, we issued $690 million of convertible notes as part of the liquidity management transaction. We saw an opportunity to use the proceeds to repurchase over $600 million of outstanding convertible notes for a considerable discount, meaningfully reducing our 2024 maturity from $575 million to approximately $200 million, as well as beginning to chip away at our notes due in 2025 and give ourselves even more flexibility as we think about navigating the next few years.With that, let's now turn to the outlook. Quarter-to-date gross revenue has been trending down in the low single digits year-over-year. Excluding the impact of Way Day 2, gross revenue was down approximately 10% year-over-year. Given the uncertainty around the consumer behavior this holiday season, we would suggest you model year-over-year revenue growth down in the high single-digit range.Shifting to gross margins, we now believe it is appropriate to move our guidance range up to 28% to 29% for the fourth quarter. Many of the drivers of gross margin outperformance in Q3 are expected to continue. But the typical holiday mix shift will weigh a bit on gross margins in Q4, so we expect to see some pressure sequentially. As I previewed earlier, we would expect customer service and merchant fees around 5% of net revenue and advertising to be 12% to 13% during Q4 as we continue to see the same set of macro pressures impact the mix of traffic across our channels.We forecast SOT G&A or OpEx excluding stock-based compensation and related taxes to come in between $495 million and $505 million for the fourth quarter. The full impact from the reduction in force, as well as the third-party labor cuts, are now flowing through. If you follow through the guidance I outlined, that would translate to adjusted EBITDA margins in the negative low single-digit range for the quarter.Now let me quickly touch on a few housekeeping items for Q4. Please assume the following: equity-based compensation related taxes of $153 million to $160 million; depreciation and amortization of approximately $93 million to $98 million; net interest expense of approximately $9 million to $10 million; weighted average shares outstanding equal to approximately 108 million shares; and CapEx in $100 million to $110 million range.In closing, I would like to reemphasize how unified and focused we are on the three key pillars we've touched on throughout this call. Cost efficiency, nailing the basics and earning customer and supplier loyalty. We have a tight plan to continue to drive cost out of the system in a way that is meaningful and proactive while also allowing for flexibility into the future, a future we see is bright for Wayfair. We're excited for the next 20 years is a laser focus on what needs to be done in 2023 as the first step on that path.Now Niraj, Steve and I will be happy to take your questions.Question-and-Answer SessionOperator[Operator Instructions] Your first question comes from the line of Brian Nagel with Oppenheimer.Brian NagelSo my first question, again, it's probably more for Kate. You talked a lot about just the advertising expense and the elevated numbers that we saw here in Q3, and then it sounds like it persist in Q4. The question I have is when should that normalize? What will it take for it to normalize? And was that a 20 odd -- at some point in '23? Then the follow-up question, I'll slow down now. I guess this is more for Niraj. We talked again about CastleGate and the penetration there around 25%. So I guess this is maybe a longer-term strategic question. Where should that number be? Where is that infrastructure, so to say, designed to be? And I guess from a more touchy feely standpoint, if I'm a customer of yours or a partner of yours now not using CastleGate, why is that? It seems like it's a pretty good offering.Niraj ShahIt's Niraj. Let me actually jump in and start off on the ad cost question, and then Kate can certainly chime in on that, and then we'll go to your CastleGate question in a second. I think the main thing, I think, to make sure you understand about that add cost to ACNR percentage number, is there's a set of things that move that number around. And a lot of them have to do with mix. And one of the things that's happening right now is that if you think about that composition of that number, you have a significant amount of traffic that effectively has zero land cost. And that's where we have a household brand, we have tens of millions of customers. We have the people downloaded the app. And depending on how top of mind the home category is, they come and they shop Wayfair. Then we also have what we do in the paid channels. And this is where we manage each channel to a take payback. We've kept all the channels at pay back. So we've not extended any all those channels are coming in at the payback numbers we want. And there, we're going out and we're targeting and running ads in a way to draw people in.Now what happens in times where the category is super top of mind like Q2 of 2020, for example, you're just getting tons of that direct free traffic, and that's going to average this number down. But in times where, frankly, the category is not top of mind, which, to be honest, this category, particularly online is not a top of mind right now, things like travel and leisure and entertainment and taking share on the discretionary dollar, what happens is just that free traffic is a little less. Those numbers each other don't need to move very much for the ACNR percentage to move up or down, even though every channel is a payback. So what I described, that's the single biggest factor that's moving that percentage around right now. And we don't particularly view that as problematic. And the reason we don't see that as problematic is that we've seen the cycle before, and we know where it will refer to as the environment normalizes.That said, there's a component of the spend that is in buckets that are either very hard to measure or are high ACNR or in the experimental phase where they're not at the percentage we want to get them to before, we'll scale them, and we're running different experiments and tests to figure out how to get it there. And so that bucket is something that, frankly, we have been looking at, and we're getting a tighter with. And so that will allow us to basically reduce ad cost without really reducing as much revenue because we're taking off the things that are the "most expensive things" or the least proven things. And so that's kind of the way to think about it and why the ad cost number maybe is where it is, but also how we can manage it.But Kate, anything you want to add on that?Kate GulliverYes. I think that covers it. I think as Niraj mentioned, obviously, as the mix shifts continue to happen, we may see some of that 12% to 13% as we guided to. But over time, we're obviously managing very closely some of that longer-term payback and bringing that in as necessary.Niraj ShahLet me just jump on your second question on CastleGate penetration. So as you noted, it's at 25%, which basically means that it's recovering quite nicely from the low hit last year when inventory was super scarce. And it's on its way to, we think, records and then break those records. It is a great offering. And so we actually have quite a large number of suppliers in it. I think the way to think about it is why would a supplier not be in it. They might not be in it, either they might be still at a stage where they're just testing it. So they might be in a very small way relative to potential. There are some suppliers who may not be in it yet. And part of that is we obviously focused on having these conversations with our category management team with suppliers who we actively work with. We also have a long tail suppliers who work with us through Partner Home, or extranet, our systems. And a lot of the CastleGate self-service functionality is relatively new. We continue to bolster that. So there's a lot of suppliers who get onboarded as it becomes easier to do it in a self-service manner.And then depending on where a supplier's origin points are, there are certain lanes that we have been able to really optimize with the way we do ocean freight and consolidation. And then there are certain locations we do not yet have the inbound flow set up for, so that just makes it a little harder for supplier to use CastleGate. They have to handle the inbound flow on their own. And as you know, this past 1.5 years has been a really complicated period because they went from sort of too much demand, too little inventory. So that was sort of -- that would work against CastleGate penetration and supplies couldn't even flow enough good for the orders they had obviously, you saw our penetration numbers get hurt. So you can imagine new suppliers are not signing up for CastleGate in that period, right?Now you go into a period where there's effectively excess amounts of inventory. So now you have suppliers who are either have been in CastleGate, now there's a lot more in, I want to drive sales, but you also now have a lot of a like, okay, hey, I now want to figure out how to grow my business in a tough environment. I want to try CastleGate. I want to do things that I wasn't willing to do weren't willing to do last year because I just didn't have that need. So I think we're in a phase of more CastleGate adoption, suppliers using it more heavily. We're adding a lot more optimization into it as we're building up the technology around the inbound flows. So this is all the reasons it will grow.In terms of what level will it get to, we haven't discussed an exact percentage out there, but what we have talked about is we built a really good logistics footprint. So that phase of opening up buildings just for footprint's sake is over. We do have some buildings coming over time that basically help us fill in some gaps in places where we need basically capacity so that we can bring more goods in.And then, frankly, as the demand environment normalizes, we'll be able to see turns in our network go up, which means that the flow of goods through our buildings, more buildings will increase just because right now, the way that you see a supplier having an inventory overhang, well, they would have an inventory overhang, not just in their own building, but in CastleGate as well because the demand forecast change for everybody. So that's I think the way to think about it. Hopefully, that's helpful.OperatorYour next question comes from the line of Steven Forbes with Guggenheim Securities.Steven ForbesI wanted to start with the outlook for overall logistic cost. So Niraj, curious if you could help frame how you see inbound and outbound. Is it just the cost environment in general as we look out to 2023? And sort of frame it around what has traditionally been, right, about 20% of overall net sales or the combination of the two. Do you see relief right as we look out over the next 12 to 24 months?Niraj ShahI would say, if you think of the 20%, we referenced that a number of times in the past. And what that was say, hey, if you took every aspect of the end-end logistics, it was round about $0.20 of every revenue dollar. That was sort of before what happened last year, more than the cost kind of really mushroomed up. So it would have rose significantly from that level. And now if you look at what's happening, things like ocean freight have come back down fairly significantly. And so it's back down to a level that would sort of put you back in that 20%. Some of the things like over-the-road trucking are coming down. They're still somewhat elevated to those aspects have come down more than other aspects. But I think broadly, what you should think about is like supply chain costs are reentering that kind of normal historical range, that $0.20. That wasn't true last year. And so it is a deflationary force.And frankly, supply/demand is -- right now, there's excess supply relative demand. That will normalize back out. So now all of a sudden, all the things we're doing to really add efficiency and elegance around having products travel less miles, by forward positioning them in the right place to begin with, that offers the customer with the speed bag of delivery. It offers the customer effectively a lower retail price because the ship costs get factored into the retail, so they see a better price. And we also see less damage. And that is taking share. And so that's a customer value proposition that we are optimizing for that also -- it's averaging down that shipping cost over time, which is the reason we've been building up the logistics.Kate GulliverSteve, I'd probably just add that as we spoke to on the call, in addition to some of the logistics costs coming in line. We also have taken a series of actions around our operational costs, and that combined is helping us see improvement on that gross margin line, 29% this quarter. And we have confidence in that continuing to grow throughout 2023 due to those combination of actions.Steven ForbesMaybe just a quick follow-up staying on that same topic. I guess if we think about the impact, right, of lower overall logistic cost and the pass through the consumer, can you just help us sort of frame the 2023 outlook for average order value directional-wise? Is it probably fair to say that we should expect average order value to be down, or is it too early to tell given mix changes potentially, et cetera?Niraj ShahYes, I think there's -- a short answer, I think AOV does drop some. The question is like how much. And that's where it gets hard to exactly quantify the how much. But there's definitely some inflation that's already reversed and you're seeing suppliers sort of being proactive around that. My cost to bring this item in in the future is lower. I have too much right now. Why don't I start pricing it closer to what the future cost can be so that I can move through it faster. So there is relief in the form of reflecting these costs coming down, absolutely.In terms of how that flows through to revenue, it gets a little tricky because if AOV falls, actually conversion rate and orders pick up. And so you actually don't net lose all of the AOV in a flow through to revenue. So depending on what you're trying to think about the AOV impacting, there's an offset that plays out to.OperatorYour next question comes from the line of Jonathan Matuszewski with Jefferies.Jonathan MatuszewskiJust on the $0.5 billion of savings coming out of the business, thanks for the examples you shared regarding returns monetization and other things. How should we think about the impact of those costs coming out to customer experience and potentially customer demand? That's my first question.Niraj ShahSo just a size, we did refer to the $500 million of savings. And so if you remember back to the last earnings call in August, we talked about a set of things that we'd already decided to do. That's what the $500 million. We said we'd provide you detail and quantify it a little later. And so we're now quantifying that. But since that expanded the plan, so we've added several hundred million dollars on top of the 500. So what you can see is like from a cost standpoint, we decided to be very aggressive around making sure that we're not carrying any excess costs that forces us to either drive up retails or not have the profit profile we want to have.And if you think back to our history for a decade, we operated out of cash flow. We grew the business 500 million in sales with no outside capital. And we did that by being very lean. And so when we kind of looked at our cost structure with a fresh set of eyes, there's just a lot of things there that we just saw that, frankly, while we're just busy managing that dramatic growth from the $9 billion overnight to up over 50% because of COVID, there's a period of extended period of time where maybe not everything was equally focused on as much as it should be. And so the return of monetization is just one example. There's a number of those areas.The way to think about what these things do is the impact to customers is effectively, it's either neutral or positive. And why do I say that? Well, either we're taking out cost that's not providing customer benefits, that's neutral if you think about that doesn't hurt the customer, or it's positive if you think about the fact that in some cases, they lower retails or some of the cost optimization we're doing in transportation actually increases the speed of delivery. So we're like net doing things that are making retails better, making speed better, taking out costs where we think it's adding, not adding to value. So we're not looking at the cost coming on the back of customers. In fact, we're looking at the proposition increasing. And what we're doing is we're sort of -- we're sort of streamlining and cleaning up some things that you could argue maybe should have done earlier.Kate, anything you want to add on the cost?Kate GulliverYes, I just want to make sure we clarify. So that 500 million is what we're -- what Niraj was sort of just referencing on the gross margin line, about 40% of that 500 million, we think about is operational cost savings and improvements that will flow through in that gross margin. And then that several hundred million more fees will come back in February with some more details on that for you and provide more context then.Jonathan MatuszewskiAnd then my second question, just on the second Way Day, I think this is the first year you held a second event here. Is this just a reflection of the current inventory environment, or are you kind of changing the philosophy in terms of how you're working with suppliers going forward? Should we expect to see kind of more regular holiday period into perpetuity? Obviously, you clarified that it doesn't impact kind of gross margin all that much. But just kind of curious what we should expect in terms of promotional holidays going forward as the inventory situation changes?Niraj ShahI think it's important to point out, we've always had, along with every other mass retailer, frankly, a pretty solid calendar. They're around the major shopping holidays, right, President's Day, Labor Day, Memorial Day, Cyber 5. So we have a calendar through the year, Way Day, safe thing give back, which we redid 5 days of deals this year. And so we have a calendar then the way to think about it is you can flex it up or down depending on the environment. And so right now, to your point, there's excess inventory and customers are -- even though they have plenty of money, they're a little more sitting on the sidelines, and that's kind of a reflection of when we look at the customer sentiment. And so promotion-- what you do in those environments is you flex out the promotional kind of calendar, and it works well. But what you don't do is you don't keep it there forever. So then as the environment normalizes, we bring it back to the normal promotional calendar that we have. And then there's periods. They're somewhat rare, but like during COVID, promotions just didn't carry the same bang that they normally do because people are just buying what they wanted every day. So there's a little bit of -- there's times work flexes the other way, too, although those are somewhat rare.So just think of it the bulk of the time you have in your normal calendar. That's what you've normally seen us do, which still has a fair amount of sale of [Indiscernible]. And then during a period like this, there will be a relatively short period of time, but you flex up. And this is -- the Way Day 2 is an example of flexing up, but don't think that's like a normal environment thing.OperatorYour next question comes from the line of Maria Ripps with Canaccord.Maria RippsCan you just talk about your fulfillment capacity in the U.S. at this point and where you are from the utilization standpoint? And do you see the possible need to optimize your footprint, sort of in a scenario that revenue continues to be soft in the near term as you focus on cost optimization initiatives, especially as Kate highlighted sort of the next layer of additional savings.Niraj ShahI think the way to think about our footprint is -- so we have a good footprint. It's fairly heavily utilized right now, but it's not necessarily at the turns level that we and our suppliers would target. And that's just a function of this inventory cycle that you're sort of going to be hearing about from everybody everywhere. You've already been hearing about, which is just folks flowed in demand against the demand profile that sits slowed. They have too much inventory or imbalance on what inventory they have. And they're all now working through it. So if you think of the buildings, it's like two factors, in fact, how much goes through the building. One, of course, is it full or not, what rate doesn't move in and now the amount of stuff in the building is quite good. The rate at which is moving in and out is lower than we would all like. that's why do you have a Way Day 2 or why you do these things or why are suppliers leaning in on price. Well, they want to rightsize their inventory. They want to get back into balance. They want to clear up the excess inventory. They know that giving customers value right now is really the only thing that will kind of dramatically change how share works. So that's happening.I think when you think about the buildings, I think it's important to realize that the buildings actually reduce our cost versus increase our cost. Because without buildings you can't -- when I talk about logistics optimization and taking cost out, the way you do that, the easiest is excess miles. Because if you bring something and so you bring it into port of L.A., we have 70% of the people in the East Coast of the U.S. items are sitting in California. Then they got to move really long distance on that final mile leg, which is your most expensive leg to the customer.Now all of a sudden, you say, hey, I'm going to put some goods off the get-go. I'll put some in Dallas, I'll put some in Jacksonville and some in New Jersey and some in Chicago, et cetera. In relation to what roughly demand balance is, all of a sudden, the customer sees a faster speed, but frankly, our shipping cost goes down dramatically because that inbound leg is not very expensive relative to the outbound leg. And but obviously, without a building in that place to put the goods in, you can't do what I just said.Our suppliers typically have one warehouse. A small percentage have two warehouses, and it's a negligible percentage more than that. So what happens is, the supplier doesn't have the infrastructure to do this on her own. This is part of why CastleGate is appealing to them. It's that they then get the benefit of the forward positioning. They're good to get the speed badge, the retails for their goods can drop. And that creates -- that's a big value proposition for customers, right, and drives demand to those items. Those items are higher converting to move up in the store. So it's a self-fulfilling positive cycle. And so driving volume through the building is actually a key piece of the strategy to take out cost.Kate GulliverYes, I'll just add, Maria, you mentioned how do we think about buildout of the FCs in relation to our cost savings initiatives and that core goal for '23. And as far as the capital expenditure is related to the FCs, we're very focused on building that when we need it, not in advance of when we need it. So we intend to be very moderated and thoughtful about any incremental capital expenditure there.Maria RippsAnd then secondly, is there anything you're seeing sort of in customer behavior, maybe more recently, it would give you some clues that customer count should return to growth here sometime in the near term?Niraj ShahYes, I mean I think what we're seeing in customer behavior is that customers are responding well and as we would have expected to what we're doing in relation to the macro environment. So if we look at the macro environment and we see customer sentiment low, we see excess goods, we know the playbook for that. That's why do we have a Way Day 2, et cetera. So we know how to run that playbook. So we run that playbook of these exciting events. We're seeing suppliers participate in a great way. We know how to market those out to customers and we're seeing that they respond. So they're coming in, they're buying. We're seeing that work incredibly well as you've seen gross margins holding up. So what we're not doing is we're not doing it by discount. Because what we're doing is we're investing in running that playbook. Suppliers understand how to use that playbook. Customers respond well to that playbook. It's a perfect playbook for this environment. And it's working really well. And that's kind of why we also gave you some feel on the impact of Way Day when we talked about the revenue levels. And I think that this environment is going to be here for a little while. It's not something that's going to go away. And the amount of excess inventory is going to also take a little bit of time to work through. So this is -- you can think about this environment lasting, I would probably say a small number of quarters. But it's not weeks or shorter months.Kate GulliverYes, but long term, our view of the potential, the total TAM, our position in that, where e-comm penetration should land, that has not changed. So while there may be some volatility in the near term, our long-term outlook has not moved.OperatorYour next question comes from the line of Greg Melich with Evercore ISI.The question has been withdrawn. Your next question comes from the line of Alexandra Staiger with Goldman Sachs.Alexandra SteigerI wanted to follow up on the active customer growth question here. Given the scale and reach you achieved during the pandemic, how do you think about the potential of customer reactivation to support forward growth? And how large do you see reactivation as an opportunity relative to new customer growth going forward?Niraj ShahI think reactivation of people is actually, frankly, a big opportunity, right? And so if you think about it, we have over time built a large kind of following amongst customers, a number of which have a wrap, a number of which are on our e-mail list, a number of which visit regularly. Right now you have a macro phenomenon where basically customers -- this category is just not the top of mind thing. And there's swings that happen. And they revert to the mean over time. We are doing a lot to make sure that we are positioning as the go-to home retailer, the largest specialist in home, that we are getting those customers coming back to us as the category becomes back more further top of mind. And then there are specific things on the marketing side we're doing to help drive that as well.And we have the benefit because a lot of what's happened on the ad landscape out there is it makes it very hard for someone who doesn't already have that customer file to effectively market at a reasonable cost. What we have because of the first-party data in the direct regions, we have the ability to reach directly to these customers. And that's a pretty -- that's a very major benefit. Only the largest companies have that benefit today because of what's changed in the privacy landscape, and then some of the technologies I'm targeting out there. And so reactivating customers that have not purchased in the recent past, we view this is a huge opportunity. There's a lot of things we're working on along those lines.OperatorYour next question comes from the line of Anna Andreeva with Needham.Anna AndreevaTwo questions from us. You mentioned that environment got worse as the third quarter progressed, but consumer obviously continues to respond. I'm not sure if I missed this, but what was the monthly cadence during the third quarter?And then secondly, could you talk a bit more about international continues to be a pretty meaningful drag on the business, obviously, macro is difficult. Do you think getting closer to breakeven is realistic for '23 in international bucket? And what are some of the expense opportunities in the business that you could implement to get there?Niraj ShahYes, great. Let me start to answer some of your questions. I'll ask Kate to jump in too. On the environment getting worse in Q3, I'm not sure exactly what the comment we made was referring to that.Kate GulliverWe don't typically disclose monthly trends. Certainly, I think although we've said and what I would reiterate is that we do see the customer coming in during promotional activities right now, and those tend to be highlights for us at this moment. And the broader macro context, obviously, is a little bit uncertain right now.Niraj ShahBut I would say, like, I don't think the environment is worsening. I think it's more like been steady. It's not improving. It's like steady as maybe the way I would phrase it to, give you the context of what I'm seeing.On the international, there's no question that out of the 4 countries -- we operate in 5 countries today, technically we have 4 major ones in terms of U.K., Germany, Canada and the United States. The United States economically is holding up the best of those 4. And that's effectively a macro, you see that in the macro data, and then, of course, we see it in our micro data. Now every country has a different set of issues it's working through. And in all of them, we believe that online sales of home goods is below the normal trend that will revert to. But as we mentioned, the timing of how exactly that curve plays out is very hard to estimate. So what are we doing? There's a big focus on micro tailwinds where we know we can drive share up, and we're executing on those. And we're actually seeing those working.Then to your question on cost, we've also -- we talked about the 500 million and then we talked about 700 million more on top of the 500 million. We're taking out a tremendous amount of cost, which we think positions us incredibly well. So if you think about the netting and if you're getting tighter on cost, a lot of that's driving down retail as well. And then at the same time, you think that there's micro tailwinds where you can take share based on things you're doing. Now, of course, you have the macro, which is quality for a period of time, but the netting of all that, we think, is quite a positive story. And so we think that will play out quite well.In terms of how to think about international, I think really at the country level, every country is working through a different set of things. And obviously, the countries were smaller in. So I think the opportunity for the tailwinds to be faster there is higher when we have a smaller share. But honestly, the macro conditions in these countries is quite different, and some of them are quite challenged right now.Kate GulliverAnd as we said, we intend to get to EBITDA profitability regardless of the top line. That's in aggregate. We're very focused on that goal. We've seen a structural reason why the international sector over time can't perform as well as the U.S. sector. And certainly, when we talk about that $500 million in cost savings and that several hundred million more, that's across our entire business, that's not focused on one geography.OperatorWe will take one more question. And your final question comes from the line of John Blackledge with Cowen.John BlackledgeTwo questions. First on competitive positioning, I think Wayfair's U.S. revenue is down kind of like high single digits through the third quarter. How do you think Wayfair is doing relative to the U.S. home market through the third quarter? Do you think Wayfair's competitive positioning has changed at all versus pre-pandemic?And then just second question, in the past, you said returning customers typically cost 4% to 7% added expense as a percent of revenue. Does that still hold? Or just given the macro environment, is it more expensive to get a returning customer?Niraj ShahSo on the first part of your question, competitive positioning in the U.S. So I think the U.S. was down, I think, 6%. And I think what we're seeing in the U.S. is that our competitive positioning, super high level of competitive positioning is the same as it's been. Our competitors are the same set of competitors. There's a long tail of competitors. So we have a few sort of large competitors and then a long tail folks in the category. I do think when we talk about the micro tailwinds though, I do think there are some things that through the cycle of COVID kind of hurt us. And so I tried to talk about kind of the big three sometimes, but they're basically product availability got pretty bad for a period of time, the speed positioning. So the forward position of the goods got quite bad.And then the retail got quite bad of the combination of how inflation was passed through and the lack of forward positioning. So if you think about that, that kind of erodes an offer. Well, where are we now? We're now reasonably far into a cycle, which is reversing those things. So speed is -- we've gotten all-time highs on speed, and that's continuing to climb at a fast rate. Availability has recovered quite nicely, and that actually has still nice headroom ahead of it, that we have very good insight into, and retail prices have been falling quite nicely. And like if you look on our side, you look at what we're offering right now for holiday and you compare it to others, I think you'd be like, yes, wow, it feels quite good.So there's sort of these things that are playing out quite well. So we feel very good about our position both as a home retailer and the bespoke things we're doing, and then specifically on these core elements of the offer and particularly where we are relative to where we were a year ago due to the kind of these external forces that were far out of our control.Now the economics of returning customers. Returning customers are definitely show you a lot of leverage. In fact, the way it works is the cost to go from one order to two orders is obviously well, and that's kind of where I think we said. We talked about repeat on average being 7%. The way I think about it is like 1 to 2 is the number percentage and then that percentage drop when you go from the second and the third order and then that percentage drops again when you go from the third to the fourth order. So as someone kind of thinking of this like this loyalty [indiscernible] they climb up the ladder, they get increasingly less expensive to -- from an ad cost standpoint for that next order. I think the thing that's complicating the ad cost outlook right now that makes it murky is the thing I tried to talk about earlier, this free channel, pay channel mix shift which is affect a by-product to the macro environment, and you will -- just like you've seen it go one way you'll see it reverse back. But I think that's what makes it harder for you to see the ad economics underneath. And so I'd just remind you of that because that I think is kind of the thing that's causing it to not be as clear.John BlackledgeThank you.Niraj ShahOkay, great. Well, I think with that, I think we're wrapping up the call. So thanks everybody for joining us this morning. And I hope you all have a great holiday season.Kate GulliverThank you all.OperatorThis concludes today's conference. You may disconnect at this time.Big institutional investors that buy up houses to rent have made metro Atlanta one of their largest markets in the country, targeting majority Black communities in particular and worsening the affordability crisis, an Atlanta Journal-Constitution investigation found.Wall Street landlords are more than twice as likely to buy homes in African American neighborhoods than majority white communities, the AJC analysis shows. Large investment firms, backed by billions of dollars, have scooped up so much inventory in Atlanta’s southern suburbs, experts say, they’ve inflated sales prices and wield outsize influence in the rental market, giving the firms substantial power to hike rents.They also have the financial firepower to outbid regular homebuyers, becoming another barrier for renters in minority areas to own a home and build equity.The buy-to-rent phenomenon is the latest roadblock to Black home ownership, housing experts say, in a long history of practices and policies that have helped fuel longstanding racial disparities in the U.S. and Atlanta.“Once you start changing the dynamics in terms of where people get to live, it has an impact not just on that individual but generations down the line in terms of their health, their education, their jobs and also their general ability to generate wealth,” said Samyukth Shenbaga, the manager of the Atlanta Regional Commission’s Community Development Division.Across the Sun Belt, investment firms are extracting wealth where families normally build it: the single-family home.Since the Great Recession, large investors have snapped up more than 65,000 homes in metro Atlanta and converted them to rentals. And the flood of Wall Street cash is pushing homeownership out of reach for many middle-class families.Investors buy in all but the wealthiest neighborhoods, but their homes are disproportionately found in African American communities.Priced out of buying, families who wind up renting from these same firms can face deplorable conditions, exorbitant fees and frequent eviction filings by out-of-state landlords driven to maximize shareholder profits.Metro Atlanta is ground zero for the investor takeover of the American Dream.The AJC examined purchases by bulk buyers, which the newspaper defines as owners of more than 50 houses across the region, and found these firms have accumulated more than 65,000 single-family homes in 11 counties since 2012.Four out of five census tracts where investors bought at least 50 homes since 2021 were majority-minority. Roughly 45% of those census tracts were ones with more than 90% minority residents.In some neighborhoods, bulk buyers own a majority of houses.Metro Atlanta home values have risen across the board from 2012 to 2022. But the AJC’s analysis found they climbed more sharply in places where investors own more houses. In the 30 ZIP codes with the most investor-owned properties, home values appreciated at nearly twice the annual rate as the 30 ZIP codes where investors own the least.Some of the biggest price appreciation in metro Atlanta has occurred along or south of I-20, historically a racial dividing line in the region.Majority Black Clayton County saw the highest home price appreciation from January 2020 to last December, up 71% in that time. Three other majority Black counties followed — Rockdale (69%), Douglas (68%) and Henry (64%).Homeownership has been a top source of middle-class wealth building for generations. Nearly three-quarters of white households in the U.S. own their own homes, compared to less than half (45.2%) of Black households, according to data from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.A landmark study from Georgia Tech found that the rise in investor activity caused a 1.4 percentage point drop in homeownership rates in metro Atlanta from 2007 to 2016. Black homeownership dropped 4.2 percentage points during that period, the research found, while homeownership among white people was unaffected.In metro Atlanta, about 53% of Black households own their own home, up slightly since 2016 and a little better than the national average. But about 79% of white Atlanta area households own their own homes.Institutional investors also are far more likely to own homes today in the neighborhoods hardest hit more than a decade ago by crisis-era foreclosures, which affected communities of color the hardest, the AJC analysis shows.Wall Street scooped up thousands of lots and foreclosed homes in the aftermath of the Great Recession. Their purchases stabilized economically distressed neighborhoods, industry proponents say. But firms often flipped those houses to other investors as the economy rebounded.Now Wall Street is back with a new business model — one that experts say inflates home values and rents.“I think it has worsened the housing inequality in the region,” said Dan Immergluck, a professor of urban studies at Georgia State University.The trend worries Maureen Webb, who fears the homebuying window is closing for younger generations. The 74-year-old retired nurse crawled her way back to homeownership after a foreclosure. Webb rented until she was able to buy a McDonough townhome in 2020 for $188,000. She recently sold the home at nearly a $100,000 profit. Large investors own 21% of all homes in her census tract, the sixth-highest in the metro area.Webb said she doesn’t know if she’d be able to afford the last place she rented, let alone buy a house, if she was a young nurse today.“I’m sure if I was still there, I couldn’t afford it,” she said.Credit: Natrice Miller / Natrice.Miller@ajc.comMemorial Drive is a dividing line in DeKalb County between wealthier and whiter northern DeKalb and southern DeKalb, which tends to be lower income and majority Black.More than half of all homes sold in 2021 south of Memorial Drive in DeKalb were to private equity firms, according to an Emory University study.Lorraine Cochran-Johnson, a DeKalb commissioner, said the county’s racial divide is the result of decades of housing policy, dating back to the days of redlining — a discriminatory practice where mortgage lenders and banks denied Black Americans access to home loans and dictated where they could live. She said the deluge of investor activity has a similar effect.“Whether or not it is an intentional redlining that’s occurring, it is disproportionately affecting Black and brown communities,” she said. “There’s just no denying it.”Thirty-five years ago, a groundbreaking AJC investigation, called The Color of Money, found white people in metro Atlanta were five times more likely to receive home loans from mainstream financial institutions as Blacks of the same income. In that 1988 investigation, the AJC found that traditional banks rarely lent in majority Black neighborhoods in Fulton and DeKalb counties, and that race — and not factors like home values or household incomes — consistently determined the lending patterns of the largest banks and mortgage lenders. The investigation led to federal home lending reforms designed to reduce discrimination.Today, Wall Street is often deploying its capital in minority neighborhoods — just not always to open the doors of homeownership to more people.Part of the equation is likely simple economics. Wall Street investors target areas where they can buy houses on the cheap and earn higher profits renting them or flipping them than they can in more expensive areas. But homes in many of these lower-cost areas started out cheaper, at least in part, because of the legacy of discriminatory practices in home buying and lending, experts say.The National Rental Home Council, which represents the largest U.S. rental home companies, denies its members’ buying practices are racially biased or targeted.“The activity of our member companies has zero to do with the race or ethnicity of individuals in communities where they buy products,” said David Howard, the organization’s executive director.Home prices are increasing across DeKalb but the fastest appreciation is south of Memorial Drive.Nine DeKalb zip codes saw home values increase by more than 40% from January 2021 to November 2022, and all but one were south of Memorial Drive or were bisected by the thoroughfare, according to Zillow.“Whether or not it is an intentional redlining that's occurring, it is disproportionately affecting Black and brown communities. There's just no denying it."One of the starkest divides is on display between 30032, south of Memorial Drive, and 30033, to the north.The 30032 zip code, which is three-quarters Black, has household incomes that are about half those of 30033, which is only 14% Black. Median home values in 30032 are about $170,000, less than half those in 30033.Wall Street has taken notice, acquiring nearly 8% of homes in the 30032 zip code in recent years, compared to just 0.2% in 30033, the AJC found.Few places are feeling the investor rush more than in Henry County.In the 20 census tracts where Wall Street has bought the highest percentage of homes, 15 — or 75% — are majority-minority neighborhoods. Eleven of those tracts are in Henry.Henry is the second-fastest-growing county in metro Atlanta and in recent years has become a magnet for warehousing and distribution facilities for some of the nation’s biggest brands, including Home Depot, Wayfair and mattress-maker Purple.Parts of Henry also have seen some of the largest rent increases in the nation. Stockbridge had the second-biggest increase in the U.S. during 2020, a 13.8% rise in monthly rent from $1,306 to $1,412, according to insurance research firm AdvisorSmith.Carlotta Harrell, the chair of the Henry County Commission, has found herself on both sides of the institutional investor issue.She listed her home for sale in 2021 and received a flood of offers from investors willing to pay cash for her house, but she turned them down.“I refused to sell it to an investor. I sold it to a family,” she said.Credit: Miguel MartinezOriana Wyche, who bought Harrell’s house, said she was trying for months to find a larger home for her growing household of five. She placed 11 bids during her search.Wyche, a real estate broker for 18 years, knows the ins and outs of the market. She said she never expected to have such a hard time finding a house. But with every rejected bid, she got a similar answer.“A lot of them told me it went to an investor who could close sooner, who could put more money down,” she said. “You just couldn’t compete.”After Harrell sold her house to downsize, she found herself competing with the same investors she denied. It took months, and 16 bids, for her to find her current three-bedroom, ranch-style home in McDonough.Housing investors became a hot topic in Stockbridge in 2021 when a developer didn’t disclose a new 75-home community would be sold to American Homes 4 Rent, a California-based investor that owns more than 1,000 properties in metro Atlanta and has since rebranded as AMH. It prompted outrage and a moratorium on single-family homes until the city could implement a rental cap.In a statement, AMH said it was not aware the developer told the city it would be a for-sale project, adding it abided by the city’s laws.“Majority-minority areas have certainly been sought out and preyed upon, so you get to a point where you need to have the zoning and codes in place yesterday,” said Elton Alexander, a Stockbridge councilman. “It’s almost impossible to put something in place to correct it.”During the first week of 2023, Henry County imposed a one-year moratorium on applications to build new apartments, townhomes and duplexes to better plan for the growth, officials said.But moratoriums also slow delivery of new housing, which can make affordability worse. Investors are quick to criticize governments for imposing restrictions, saying there’s demand from people who prefer to rent.“These actions are not only counterproductive to local economies, but they attempt to segregate people based on how they choose to live,” AMH said in a statement.Valerie Brown, a Henry real estate agent, said she used to recommend clients avoid buying in neighborhoods with lots of rentals, but that’s become impossible.“Now, if I recommend that to my clients, they would be on the streets,” she said. “There wouldn’t be any place to live.”-John Perry, technical director of the AJC’s data journalism team, contributed to this article.Credit: Natrice Miller / Natrice.Miller@ajc.com
                
                    
                        Let Retail Dive's free newsletter keep you informed, straight from your inbox.
                    
                
            Topics covered: retail tech, e-commerce, in-store operations, marketing, and more.Topics covered: brand launches, expansion opportunities, partnerships, startup trends, funding, and more.Topics covered:  Retail advertising, social media, analytics, personalization, search, video, and more.Topics covered: e-commerce, payment technology, IT, in-store tech, cyber security, and more.Topics covered: supply chain and logistics, sourcing, real estate, merchandising, and more.After declarations about “decisive” actions to clear excess goods earlier this year, levels are still high and markdowns rampant.In late September, Nike joined the cadre of companies to announce something along the lines of “decisive action” on inventory. That was the phrase used — twice — by Nike Chief Financial Officer Matthew Friend on a call with analysts, one that mentioned the word “inventory” 48 times. Friend echoed other executives in deploying that phrase. Target chief Brian Cornell, for example, mentioned “bold decisive actions” and a “decisive path” in an August analyst call (in which the word “inventory” was featured even more, at 73 times). Both executives were talking about markdowns and other measures to rid their operations of product that customers weren’t buying, at least not at the levels or prices their companies expected. By the second quarter of 2022, retail inventories were up 31% over Q2 last year, according to S&P Capital IQ and FTI Consulting analysis. FTI Consulting’s Global Co-Leader of Corporate Finance and Restructuring, Michael Eisenband, wrote recently that the inventory overhang was potentially “the most troubling sign that the tide may be turning against the retail sector.”Because of its timing, Nike’s announcement brought a new wave of jitters through an industry that was been jostled around since the early months of the year, with demand for discretionary goods sagging in an era of spiking prices for gas, food and housing“Nike was pretty ugly,” Michael Baker, senior research analyst with D.A. Davidson, said in an interview. “That was even worse than we thought.”The aim of those major players, and many others, has been to free up space in stores and warehouses and purge themselves of seasonal or outdated items. That, in turn, is so retailers can reset for the holidays, with products people will buy.The big question hanging over the season is whether companies will succeed in their efforts. Are inventories at that Goldilocks just right levels, or will the inventory hangover last through the holidays and beyond? And if the latter, just how bad will it be?“Retailers are over-inventoried, and they’re very concerned. They placed too many orders when there were supply chain challenges. So now they’re sitting on a glut of inventory as they enter this holiday season, and they know the economy is turning,” Alexa Driansky, a director in AlixPartners retail practice, said in an interview. “I think the year ahead is going to be a bloodbath.”In retail, inventory has hit “record” and “peak” levels, according to an early October note from Cowen analysts. Driving the dollar value of that inventory is both unit increases and costs for acquiring the inventory. The analysts added that, because of inventory levels, “gross margin expectations into 2023 are too high as markdown allowances rise, storage costs rise and higher cost inventory flows onto income statements and [foreign exchange] transactional pressure is rising.”“I think the year ahead is going to be a bloodbath.”Alexa DrianskyDirector, AlixPartners Retail PracticeD.A. Davidson’s Baker wrote in September that retailers were “drowning in inventory,” with levels up 22% from last year and hitting a 10-year high. What’s more is the gap between inventory growth and sales growth has become a chasm over recent quarters. At the time of the note, Baker wrote that margins should be near their “trough.” Since then, Nike reported, giving the market yet another gut punch. The sports gear giant said that inventory grew 65% in the quarter ending Aug. 31 while gross margin fell by 220 basis points on markdowns, supply chain costs and unfavorable currency exchange rates.Less than a month later, Adidas followed suit, cutting its guidance (again) for sales and margins for the year while citing, in part, “a significant inventory build-up as a result of lower consumer demand in major Western markets since the beginning of September.” The extra inventory, the company added, would likely necessitate markdowns through the rest of the year. Hasbro was another to suffer. It reported in October a 31% hit to operating profit in its consumer products unit as inventory buildup led the toymaker to take on extra costs and markdowns. “Big brands as well as department stores have come out and said, ‘Hey, we’re still in the throes of it,’” Matt Garfield, managing director with FTI Consulting, said in an interview. “We’ve already made the pullback that we can, we’ve downsized orders, we’ve canceled orders. The feeling is still there.”While last year many players might have wished for more inventory amid robust demand and widespread supply chain snafus, today there is no upside to high inventory levels as demand falters. All the options cost the bottom line in some way. Likely the most common way to cope with overages is markdowns. In a KPMG survey of retail executives released in September, 56% said they expected an inventory hangover following the holiday period. Of those, 52% planned to use clearance sales to manage the excess, 48% expected to cut receipts and manage inventory down, and 41% planned to use sell-downs or return items to vendors, according to the KPMG study. Another 24% said they planned to sell inventory to liquidators and discount retailers. An Accenture survey of retail executives released in October found nearly all of them (99%) said they had increased their promotional activity as part of their holiday plans. Another 35% said their companies are deeply discounting or taking other measures to get rid of excess inventory.“Retailers who will be stuck with all this excess inventory have no option other than to either clear out the inventory by significantly discounting and taking a profit hit this year, or packing and holding the inventory … and putting it in storage and holding it for next year,” Driansky said. Garfield has talked with one apparel company that has set up multiple reserve distribution centers to handle excess inventory. It’s a strategy, Garfield noted, that only works with core commodities (such as colored polo shirts or shorts that sell year to year), and also a strategy that can get costly. That extra warehouse spaces costs money, for one thing.  “Everyone always thinks about the working capital impacts, but they fail to think of the operational impacts,” Garfield said. “You become a hell of a lot less efficient when you're at capacity or above capacity.” For example, Garfield noted, when distribution sites are loaded up with inventory, workers might have to move multiple pallets around to get to the pallet they need. Garfield also pointed to an apparel company he’s worked with that has had to pick from off-site storage facilities because the company ran out of pick locations in its primary distribution center.There is also the option of selling off the inventory to a liquidator, but Garfield said he hasn’t observed as much of that. “It’s too much of a margin cut for the level of inventory excess we’re seeing,” Garfield said. “Liquidation makes sense when you’re talking about a limited part of your portfolio.” But in many cases it’s the “entire assortment” that is affected by overages, Garfield added.“You become a hell of a lot less efficient when you’re at capacity or above capacity.”Matt GarfieldManaging Director, FTI ConsultingThe costs and margin hits to holding or clearing inventory aren’t the only pain point for retailers and brands. While snarls have largely eased from last year, companies still face elevated supply chain costs from higher fuel prices, wages and warehousing rates. That said, the Cowen team pointed to deflating freight and input costs as a “silver lining” to the holiday gloom — the downside is those costs are unwinding in large part because consumer demand is down and retailers are selling less, and therefore shipping less. All of the costs and markdowns explain why the Cowen analysts said that margin woes will continue into 2023, and that consensus estimates for “aggressive” margin recovery in the retail world were likely too sunny and need downward revisions. So is there any chance that the “bold” and “decisive” actions taken this year to correct ahead of the holidays worked? Not if Nike and Adidas are any predictor, but things may have improved in the grand scheme.“Do we think they’ll be clean by the holidays? We think they’ll be cleaner than the second quarter,” Baker said.  “So when all is said and done, looking at year over year growth in inventories … it will still be up and still be heavy, but it will still be up less than we saw in the second quarter.”Inna Kuznetsova, CEO of supply chain planning firm ToolsGroup, said in emailed comments that, with early holiday shopping underway in October, “we’re already seeing a lot of excess inventory being discounted heavily now due to errors in planning.”Kuznetsova pointed to electronics, and particularly televisions, as an overstocked category in the industry, as well as household items and home goods, and apparel and fashion, while other categories such as cosmetics are seeing rising demand. FTI’s Garfield also noted that some categories are grappling with excess inventory more than others. He pointed to home decor — which saw consumers pull forward a good deal of spending in 2021 — as well as footwear and apparel as having a hard go of it. “Certain sectors are just going to get hammered, and they’re not having the opportunity to clear through that inventory,” Garfield said. “The bigger challenge is how [do] they create freshness, bring the seasonality while dealing with all these high inventories.”For all the pressure on margins from markdowns, Baker also pointed to a countervailing effect for retailers: all of the discounts could drive revenue gains by enticing consumers to buy more. “We still think the volumes will be good, because the pricing will be a little bit more compelling and the consumer does seem to be out there spending,” Baker said. “But there is a discount, there's an offset because as a retailer you're just earning fewer dollars per unit.”For brands and manufacturers on the other end of all the order cancellations by retailers this year, sales are going to hurt. “One of the things we've heard consistently is that retailers are not ordering product,” Baker said. “So that's bad for any supplier to a retailer.”But even once retailers clear their inventory of excesses, there’s another question facing them: Will consumers go back to buying at full price after multiple seasons of hunting and buying discounted goods? HSBC analysts put it this way in a note about Nike’s rough year, “It is likely that consumers who had built in the habit to buy at full price will shortly develop bad habits again.”Get the free daily newsletter read by industry expertsShaking up a business can be a sign of innovation, or trouble. For DTC brands, the best move may be found in retail’s oldest playbook.The Canadian brand introduced retail to athleisure. Now Brooks Brothers sells stretch dress shirts and Levi’s owns a yoga business.Keep up with the story. Subscribe to the Retail Dive free daily newsletterKeep up with the story. Subscribe to the Retail Dive free daily newsletterSubscribe to Retail Dive for top news, trends & analysisGet the free daily newsletter read by industry expertsShaking up a business can be a sign of innovation, or trouble. For DTC brands, the best move may be found in retail’s oldest playbook.The Canadian brand introduced retail to athleisure. Now Brooks Brothers sells stretch dress shirts and Levi’s owns a yoga business.The free newsletter covering the top industry headlines
                
                    
                        Let Retail Dive's free newsletter keep you informed, straight from your inbox.
                    
                
            Topics covered: retail tech, e-commerce, in-store operations, marketing, and more.Topics covered: brand launches, expansion opportunities, partnerships, startup trends, funding, and more.Topics covered:  Retail advertising, social media, analytics, personalization, search, video, and more.Topics covered: e-commerce, payment technology, IT, in-store tech, cyber security, and more.Topics covered: supply chain and logistics, sourcing, real estate, merchandising, and more.As its losses widened, Wayfair’s revenues also continued to decline in the third quarter.The online home retailer benefited in the early months of the pandemic as customers avoided stores for purchases and actively sought out goods for their homes, but has since faced declines as demand waned. And Wayfair’s revenue declines this quarter lap a period of already reduced demand following early pandemic highs. On a two-year basis, net revenue fell about 26%.More recently, not only has demand shifted, consumers are now met with inflation and other economic pressures causing them to pull back on discretionary spending.While inflation is affecting most retailers, Wayfair is hit particularly hard due to the fact that many consumers make impulse purchases at the retailer — which “are the first purchases to disappear when times become tight” — and that the company’s customers have been more affected by the current economic environment, according to GlobalData Managing Director Neil Saunders.The company, which has failed to turn a profit every year but one — 2020 — sank deeper into the red in the third quarter. Operating loss for the year so far has already topped $1 billion from a profit of $102 million in the same period last year, while net loss year to date is $980 million from an income of $71 million last year.Get the free daily newsletter read by industry expertsShaking up a business can be a sign of innovation, or trouble. For DTC brands, the best move may be found in retail’s oldest playbook.The Canadian brand introduced retail to athleisure. Now Brooks Brothers sells stretch dress shirts and Levi’s owns a yoga business.Subscribe to Retail Dive for top news, trends & analysisGet the free daily newsletter read by industry expertsShaking up a business can be a sign of innovation, or trouble. For DTC brands, the best move may be found in retail’s oldest playbook.The Canadian brand introduced retail to athleisure. Now Brooks Brothers sells stretch dress shirts and Levi’s owns a yoga business.The free newsletter covering the top industry headlines
                
                    
                        Let Retail Dive's free newsletter keep you informed, straight from your inbox.
                    
                
            Topics covered: retail tech, e-commerce, in-store operations, marketing, and more.Topics covered: brand launches, expansion opportunities, partnerships, startup trends, funding, and more.Topics covered:  Retail advertising, social media, analytics, personalization, search, video, and more.Topics covered: e-commerce, payment technology, IT, in-store tech, cyber security, and more.Topics covered: supply chain and logistics, sourcing, real estate, merchandising, and more.Though imports are down, retailers are contending with an overflow of inventory. Nike, for example, said its North American inventory spiked by 65% in Q1, which is hitting gross margins, as multiple seasons of inventory landed at the same time. Nordstrom is another retailer discounting its products and clearing out inventory to accommodate new items.For off-price retailers, the glut of inventory hasn’t exactly been good news. Initially, off-price retailers hoped that the influx of stock would have allowed them to buy more goods at lower prices and profit from subsequent price increases. But retailers are holding onto their inventory and marking it down themselves. Burlington CEO Michael O’Sullivan said during the company’s Q2 earnings call that the retailer is focusing on finding the optimal inventory levels and providing an ideal product assortment for shoppers while reducing costs. Analysts are also watching the impacts of inventory on retailers this holiday season, alongside a slowdown in consumer spending, which could hurt retailers' sales predictions.“The holiday season has already started for some shoppers and, thanks to pre-planning, retailers have plenty of merchandise on hand to meet demand,” NRF vice president for supply chain and customs policy Jonathan Gold said in a statement. “Many retailers brought in merchandise early this year to beat rising inflation and ongoing supply chain disruption issues. Despite the lower volumes, retailers are still experiencing challenges along the supply chain, including U.S. ports and intermodal rail yards.”Get the free daily newsletter read by industry expertsShaking up a business can be a sign of innovation, or trouble. For DTC brands, the best move may be found in retail’s oldest playbook.The Canadian brand introduced retail to athleisure. Now Brooks Brothers sells stretch dress shirts and Levi’s owns a yoga business.Subscribe to Retail Dive for top news, trends & analysisGet the free daily newsletter read by industry expertsShaking up a business can be a sign of innovation, or trouble. For DTC brands, the best move may be found in retail’s oldest playbook.The Canadian brand introduced retail to athleisure. Now Brooks Brothers sells stretch dress shirts and Levi’s owns a yoga business.The free newsletter covering the top industry headlinesAsiaVisionAsiaVisionBed Bath & Beyond (NASDAQ:BBBY) is fighting for its life. The omnichannel domestic wares retailer is aggressively moving ahead with streamlining its SG&A profile with a new round of layoffs, the closure of 150 brick-and-mortar stores, and realising around $250 million in cost savings by the end of its fiscal 2022. The company's fiscal 2022 third quarter earnings call was sombre, with management moving forward with an additional $80 million to $100 million in cost savings with an overall tone that signalled just how much in distress the company is. Overall, the savings should see the company realize around $600 million in cost efficiencies, with employees across the corporate, supply chain and store portfolio taking the brunt of the latest round of layoffs. The future now seems bleak with a chapter 11 filing floated by bears as a very real possibility in 2023. Indeed, the $190 million market cap Union, New Jersey-based retailer has hired restructuring consultancy AlixPartners and restructuring lawyers at Kirkland & Ellis for guidance.However, Bed Bath & Beyond's loss will likely be Wayfair's (W) gain. Both companies are competing for the largest gross merchandise value share of US home decor sales and Wayfair's market share has pulled ahead over the last four quarters from what used to be a Bed Bath & Beyond leadership.YipitDataYipitDataBoston, Massachusetts-based Wayfair, a $4 billion eCommerce company, saw its 2022 third quarter share of US home decor GMV at $300 million. This was versus $180 million for Bed Bath & Beyond. Whilst both suffered a comparative decline, Bed Bath & Beyond's fell by about a third, and at a stark divergence from the year-ago comp where it had a larger GMV share than Wayfair.YipitDataYipitDataWayfair has now captured at least 40% of Bed Bath & Beyond customers' wallets. A clear dominance that has even come ahead of the nearest closest competitor Overstock (OSTK). The play here is Wayfair's outperformance and dominance of US home decor GMV will speed up on continued Bed Bath & Beyond headwinds. Employee turnover, low morale, and potentially lower marketing spending would be some of the factors driving this shift.YipitDataYipitDataWhilst Bed Bath & Beyond's bulls would be right to state that home decor sales account for substantially less of its overall revenues, the decline and capitalization on its woes by Wayfair now forms an investable investment play. This play could of course turn awry if Bed Bath & Beyond is able to survive its disruption. The company just released fiscal 2022 third quarter results ending November 26, 2022, which shed light on its balance sheet strength as bears eye a liquidity gap that could shift the company to no longer remain a going concern.Bed Bath & Beyond just published earnings for its fiscal 2022 third quarter that saw revenue come in at $1.26 billion, a decline of 33% from the year-ago quarter and a miss of $8 million on consensus estimates. The company blamed this on a decrease in customer traffic and lower in-stock provision. GAAP Gross Margin of 22.1% was a decline from 27.7% in the prior second quarter and came on the back of continued clearance activity, promotional activity and the discontinuation of higher margin Owned Brands merchandise.Data by YChartsWe've now seen the previous positive dichotomy between Bed Bath & Beyond's gross margins versus Wayfair's fall into negative territory. Wayfair's fiscal 2022 third quarter earnings saw its gross margins at 29%, higher than Bed Bath & Beyond's second and third quarter gross margins. Wayfair's third quarter revenue also came in at $2.8 billion, a smaller 10.3% decrease from the year-ago quarter but a miss by $10 million on consensus estimates.Whilst Bed Bath & Beyond would participate in the broad stock market rally to close out the day with a 28% gain, the results held little for bulls to cheer for. Net loss for the quarter came in at $392.97 million, a 42% increase from $276.43 million in the year-ago comp. This came in spite of cost reduction initiatives that drove SG&A expense of $583.6 million, down from $698 million in the year-ago quarter. And whilst net loss for the third quarter included $100.7 million of non-cash impairment charges, negative cash flow from operations was still elevated at $307.6 million. This was against cash and equivalents of $153.5 million as of the end of the quarter. Overall liquidity including an asset-based lending facility and FILO loan was around $500 million, less than two quarters of cash runway at the current pace of quarterly cash burn.Data by YChartsIt's hard to ascribe a future to Bed Bath & Beyond with so little runway left and with cash burn from operations still so virulent. This clears a pathway forward for Wayfair where current home decor GMV trends continue even as a discombobulated US housing market continues to drive a decline in overall sales for the sector. Pending home sales are falling just as the US is predicted to slip into a recession this year. There is a positive correlation between home sales and demand for decor.Both Wayfair and Bed Bath & Beyond are down markedly over the last 12 months, with Wayfair having realized a 77.7% retracement versus 85% for Bed Bath & Beyond. This has pulled Wayfair's underlying valuation metrics into positive territory. Its price-to-forward sales multiple now stands at 0.33x, a 62% difference from its peer group median of 0.89x. The company also held cash and equivalents of $1.29 billion. However, this was against cash burn from operations of $431 million. Fundamentally, a Bed Bath & Beyond collapse would now most directly benefit Wayfair and renders the eCommerce company a watchlist consideration for investors looking for exposure to the eventual recovery of the sector.This article was written byDisclosure: I/we have no stock, option or similar derivative position in any of the companies mentioned, and no plans to initiate any such positions within the next 72 hours. I wrote this article myself, and it expresses my own opinions. I am not receiving compensation for it (other than from Seeking Alpha). I have no business relationship with any company whose stock is mentioned in this article.Founded in 1993 by brothers Tom and David Gardner, The Motley Fool helps millions of people attain financial freedom through our website, podcasts, books, newspaper column, radio show, and premium investing services.Founded in 1993 by brothers Tom and David Gardner, The Motley Fool helps millions of people attain financial freedom through our website, podcasts, books, newspaper column, radio show, and premium investing services.You’re reading a free article with opinions that may differ from The Motley Fool’s Premium Investing Services. Become a Motley Fool member today to get instant access to our top analyst recommendations, in-depth research, investing resources, and more. Learn MoreShares of Wayfair (W -6.07%), Macy's (M -2.71%), and Nordstrom (JWN -3.33%) fell hard on Wednesday, down 12.5%, 11.8%, and 9.6%, respectively, as of 2:17 p.m. ET.There wasn't any material news out of these retailers today. However, given Walmart's (WMT -0.67%) poor earnings report yesterday and Target's (TGT -1.75%) terrible earnings report today, investors appear to be selling any and all retail names.Even though inflation is high and there have been widespread concerns over highly valued tech stocks, the big box retailers appeared to be safe havens since the start of the year. After all, retail spending statistics from March and April were pretty good. Yesterday's retail sales report from April showed a 0.9% month-over-month increase, and March sales were revised higher. However, it may appear that retail sales aren't strong enough to offset cost inflation. Yesterday, Walmart beat on revenue but missed badly on earnings per share, and lowered its profit guidance for the year, even though sales should be higher. Then today, Target reported a beat on sales, but its operating margins absolutely crashed, going down to 5.3% from 9.2% in the year-ago quarter. As a result, earnings per share were nearly cut in half! Management cited lower prices to move excess inventory, as well as higher transportation costs. That appears to indicate consumers are slowing down their spending on physical goods. Meanwhile, higher transportation costs are raising costs. That's not good for any retailer, these three included. Yesterday, Wayfair announced a hiring freeze, a seeming admission that things are too uncertain right now amid the economic reopening. "We see a great deal of uncertainty in the overall economy and believe it's prudent to make some adjustments that will allow us to control our own destiny," a representative said. Two weeks ago, the online furniture retailer reported revenue that was down nearly 14% from a year earlier, as earnings swung to a loss. Clearly, as the pandemic wanes, Wayfair is seeing less demand for home furniture purchases as consumers' wallets are pinched and they focus more on experiences.Could things be better for clothing and apparel retailers like Macy's and Nordstrom? After all, if people are going out more after the pandemic, maybe they will purchase a new shirt or set of khakis.Investors won't know for sure yet, as Macy's and Nordstrom don't report first-quarter earnings until next week. Yet with commodity prices on the rise, one can be sure that these retailers' costs will be up. Whether they will be able to pass on those costs with price increases to consumers remains to be seen.Image source: Getty Images.When large retailers like Walmart and Target deliver bad news, one can be sure the rest of retail will catch whatever cold they have. Investors in the sector should be cautious right now, and think about which retailers might do better in an inflationary and reopening environment. Premium brands may hold up better than mass brands, since the high-end consumer will likely be able to weather higher prices better than the lower and middle-class consumers who frequent Walmart and Target. That could -- with an emphasis on the word could -- benefit Nordstrom.Yet while apparel retailers may do relatively better given the reopening, clothing and apparel is also fairly discretionary. With consumers pulling back on discretionary purchases for more essentials and experiences, these stocks are still tough to own amid inflation and rising rates.Billy Duberstein has no position in any of the stocks mentioned. His clients may own shares of the companies mentioned. The Motley Fool recommends Wayfair. The Motley Fool has a disclosure policy.*Average returns of all recommendations since inception. Cost basis and return based on previous market day close.
Invest better with The Motley Fool. Get stock recommendations, portfolio guidance, and more from The Motley Fool's premium services.
Making the world smarter, happier, and richer.Market data powered by Xignite.
                
                    
                        Let Retail Dive's free newsletter keep you informed, straight from your inbox.
                    
                
            Topics covered: retail tech, e-commerce, in-store operations, marketing, and more.Topics covered: brand launches, expansion opportunities, partnerships, startup trends, funding, and more.Topics covered:  Retail advertising, social media, analytics, personalization, search, video, and more.Topics covered: e-commerce, payment technology, IT, in-store tech, cyber security, and more.Topics covered: supply chain and logistics, sourcing, real estate, merchandising, and more.As demand wavers and capital gets harder to find, some could face default and bankruptcy, including last year’s digital darlings.Last year was a great one for many if not most in and connected to the retail industry, except for its restructuring experts. (But don’t worry about them — the bankruptcy lawyers and consultants had a sensational 2020.)Revlon and Olympia Sports aside, bankruptcies remain slow after years of “apocalypse” and the surge in the pandemic’s first year. The travails of 2020 pulled forward many bankruptcies that might have happened this year or next. Those reorganized were (theoretically) left with cleaner balance sheets, trimmed store footprints and stronger financial positions.Yet retail is a big industry with many players, not all of them on solid footing. Consumers are still capricious. The digital transformation is ongoing and expensive to adapt to. Supply chains are complicated and difficult to master, or even fully understand. COVID-19 is still with us. Demand is as difficult to predict today as it ever was.With stimulus payments gone, consumers under pressure from inflation, capital markets tighter and business inputs still expensive, the financially or operationally weaker players who rode a wave of high demand and a quiet promotional environment are at risk once again. In a summer report on vulnerable retailers, Creditntell cited high inflation, falling demand and “bloated” inventory levels as pressures on margins and profits. “Potentially the biggest stumbling block will be the consumer,” Albert Furst, chief operating officer of Creditntell, said in an interview.   One proprietary measure of bankruptcy risk in the market comes from CreditRiskMonitor’s FRISK scores, which specifically measure the probability of a company filing for bankruptcy within 12 months. The scores factor in various data, including trading volatility, financial metrics and analytics from the firm’s own platform that is often used by company credit managers.This time last year the retail companies that carried the very lowest FRISK scores, indicating the highest risk of bankruptcy, numbered just three.As of Sept. 30 this year, the number had surged to 18, a cohort size much more in line with pre-pandemic risk levels. Of that, nine retailers had a FRISK score of 1, indicating a 9.99% to 50% chance of filing for bankruptcy within the next 12 months.Source: CreditRiskMonitor's FRISK scores as of Sept. 30Another nine had a FRISK score of 2, representing a 4% to 9.99% chance of bankruptcy by CreditRiskMonitor’s calculations.Source: CreditRiskMonitor's FRISK scores as of Sept. 30Among those companies with the lowest scores are digitally savvy operators that held initial public offerings in recent years, including The RealReal, Stitch Fix, ThredUp and Digital Brands Group. That perhaps should not come as a surprise, given the slump in apparel amid inflation on food and gas as well as the high expenses of e-commerce and the losses many digital darlings racked up before (and after) going public.  FRISK scores only cover those companies with publicly traded stocks or bonds. Credit ratings and other measures of default risk turn up other names as well.Those with the lowest ratings from Creditntell include, as of July, Tuesday Morning, Party City, GameStop, Rite Aid, Bed Bath & Beyond, Casper and Joann.Source: CreditntellMeanwhile, Fitch Ratings’ most recent lists of loans of concern include a handful of retailers, including Belk, Men’s Wearhouse, Boardriders and Premier Brands Group (a reorganized incarnation of the old Nine West Holdings).Here’s a closer look at some of those most at risk:Bed Bath & Beyond has been on a roller coaster since the pandemic began. When consumers first turned to the homes they were stuck in during the days of social distancing, the retailer’s sales boomed and a long-sought turnaround appeared to be taking hold.But supply chain issues last year and then a drop in discretionary spending in 2022 sent sales and profits spiraling. Mark Tritton, who came from Target to lead Bed Bath & Beyond as CEO starting in 2019, left the company after an abysmal quarterly earnings report this summer.Reports from the Wall Street Journal detailed the failed efforts of Tritton to juice up Bed Bath & Beyond’s private label offering. Analysts have pointed to strategic flaws and a botched execution of Tritton’s turnaround plan as well as underlying weakness that preceded Tritton.“I think [Tritton] did way too much way too soon,” Furst said. “And he did it during the supply chain challenges.”Now there is a leadership vacuum on top of macroeconomic and operational challenges, with Tritton gone, a permanent CEO yet to be selected, the death by suicide of Chief Financial Officer Gustavo Arnal, and the elimination of the operating chief and store chief roles.As it tries once again to turn itself around, Bed Bath & Beyond has new debt financing as well as a plan to close over 150 stores and lay off staff to cut expenses.“They’ve got a lot to rectify really fast,” Furst said.One of the first innovators of the off-price model, Tuesday Morning went into bankruptcy in 2020, after years of losses and middling sales as it tried to compete with the off-price giants. Its Chapter 11 also followed a sharp drop in its revenue in the early months of COVID-19.The company shed stores and gained new debt financing in bankruptcy and exited last year. But amid global economic headwinds, Tuesday Morning in May revised down its sales expectations and projected an adjusted EBITDA loss of up to $29 million for its current fiscal year. S&P Global Market Intelligence has listed it among the most vulnerable retail companies.In the company’s most recent period, it reported comp sales growth of 8% while its gross margin rate compressed by more than seven percentage points and its operating loss increased by more than $10 million from last year.In September, Tuesday Morning struck a deal with Retail Ecommerce Ventures — owner of the Pier 1, Radioshack, Stein Mart and other retail brands — that provides $32 million in new debt, some of which can be converted to equity, and which will pay down some of its existing debt and fund a move into e-commerce and omnichannel retail.As part of the agreement with REV, Tuesday Morning will get access to the latter’s digital platform and the rights to sell products from the Pier 1 brand, which REV acquired in 2020.The investment could be a hopeful sign, at least for the near term. “I assume with that investment, there’s no plan to file within months, if you’re going to drop money into it,” Furst said. “Different companies have different issues. They were never a balance sheet problem. They were always an operational problem.”Furst also noted that Tuesday Morning’s lot didn’t improve much after trimming its store base in bankruptcy or during the surge in home goods sales during the pandemic. As for the introduction of Pier 1 products via REV: “What was the demand for Pier 1 before? Will a store within a store help that much?” Furst said.Party City went into the pandemic with financial and competitive concerns. A one-time leveraged buyout, it still carries a heavy debt load. Digital players and generalists have been eating into its brick-and-mortar Halloween City business since 2019. A foray into toys, after Toys R Us liquidated, didn’t take.And then the pandemic happened. The company’s core business revolves around parties and social celebrations. The health risks of just being around people led to a cratering in the company’s sales.While parties and sales emerged from their pandemic lows, to an extent, Party City has also grappled with helium shortages, inflated operating costs and other challenges. In the second quarter, the company’s retail sales fell 4.6% while gross profit margin shrunk by 680 basis points.Compounding challenges such as freight and helium costs have been “a sales slowdown attributed to consumers traveling more and taking celebrations on the road, as well as lapping government stimulus and the reopening of the country last year,” Telsey Advisory Group analysts said in an August note. Against the tough environment, the company had lowered its guidance for the year.The RealReal is part of a cohort of e-commerce specialists to go public in recent years despite a history of loss-making. The company’s revenue grew more than 40% between 2018 and 2020, but the luxury resale marketplace struggled during the pandemic and the apparel slump that came with it. The company also weathered reputational issues when its authentication process faced scrutiny.This year, founder Julie Wainwright stepped down abruptly from the CEO role after 11 years as the company turns more attention to profitability.Unlike others in the digital space, The RealReal has been adding staff after labor shortfalls led to trouble acquiring inventory. In its most recent reporting period, the company’s revenue increased by 47%, yet average order value was down as customers traded down to less expensive items in the face of inflation.Executives told analysts that they expected a surge in apparel demand late in the pandemic to subside eventually, but that it happened faster than anticipated.Wayfair has become a force in the home goods realm. Few can rival it in e-commerce home goods sales. Yet for most of its life, the company has lost money.The year 2020 was an exception. Wayfair brought in more than $360 million in operating profit. Prior to that, the company posted a net loss for every year it has ever reported publicly, going back to 2011. And even the profits it made in 2020, when home goods sales and e-commerce were booming, came with a razor-thin operating margin.Last year, Wayfair was back in the red. By July of this year, the company was the only e-commerce retailer to lose revenue among the top in the sector, according to GlobalData.“There is a fundamental weakness in Wayfair’s business model: It needs considerably larger volumes and many more regular customers to attain profitability,” GlobalData Managing Director Neil Saunders said at the time. “Now [that] demand is normalizing, Wayfair is back to making eye-watering losses.”In August, the company announced a 10% cut to its corporate staff as e-commerce continued its slowdown and Wayfair looked to rein in costs. The company said then that it was also working to make “substantial reductions” to third-party labor costs.“We were seeing the tailwinds of the pandemic accelerate the adoption of ecommerce shopping, and I personally pushed hard to hire a strong team to support that growth,” Wayfair CEO Niraj Shah wrote in a note to employees at the time of the announced layoffs. “This year, that growth has not materialized as we had anticipated. Our team is too large for the environment we are now in, and unfortunately we need to adjust.”For all its challenges and history of losses, Wayfair’s market cap remained near $4 billion at the end of September, a sign that the market still has confidence in Wayfair’s potential for profitability.Less than a year after going public, Digital Brands Group dropped language into its Securities and Exchange filings that it may have to file for bankruptcy without additional capital.While the company has raised new funds since then, it has amassed extensive losses. Digital Brands is built around its acquisition philosophy, by which it aims to become an expansive style shop for consumers and potentially move into new categories as well. But acquisitions are expensive, and the company has yet to show it can make its model profitable.Moreover, Digital Brands has also been sued by creditors over late payments. This spring, one of those creditors demanded that Digital Brands put its expansion plans on hold until it was paid for goods shipped years ago, in 2019 and 2020.Digital Brands said in June that it was moving closer to the closing of its deal to acquire the apparel brand Sundry, which made nearly $23 million in revenue last year. The company in Q2 made $3.7 million in revenue while its operating loss, at about $10.7 million, decreased slightly from last year. After Nasdaq threatened to delist Digital Brand’s stock, the company was granted, after a hearing, until Jan. 17 to comply with the stock market’s listing requirements.Get the free daily newsletter read by industry expertsThe e-commerce giant is looking past the industry to expand its reach, and rivals have figured out ways to compete.With the threat of a recession looming, the new year brings about a slew of challenges for retailers — but not all is gloomy.Keep up with the story. Subscribe to the Retail Dive free daily newsletterKeep up with the story. Subscribe to the Retail Dive free daily newsletterSubscribe to Retail Dive for top news, trends & analysisGet the free daily newsletter read by industry expertsThe e-commerce giant is looking past the industry to expand its reach, and rivals have figured out ways to compete.With the threat of a recession looming, the new year brings about a slew of challenges for retailers — but not all is gloomy.The free newsletter covering the top industry headlinesEarlier this month online furniture retailer Made.com, once a darling of the retail sector, collapsed into administration, with Next grabbing its brand, domain names and intellectual property for £3.4 million. How far the firm had fallen can be seen in the fact that it’s only a few years since it floated on the London Stock Exchange for £775 million.Founded by Brent Hoberman, co-founder of Lastminute.com, and Chinese entrepreneur Ning Li, Made.com had enjoyed a good pandemic as people trapped in their homes embarked on upgrades to their living and working environments. The DIY and home improvement sector saw a massive boom in business during the height of the COVID crisis; so too did the furnishing game.But as lockdowns lifted and the cost-of-living crisis kicked in, disposable income on a new sofa or a bespoke desk started to become tighter. Zelf Hussain, partner at administrator PWC summed up the situation thus:A combination of factors, including significant decline in consumer spending from cost of living pressures, rising import costs and continuing supply chain pressures, has meant the business could no longer continue.The firm was certainly hit by rising inflation and an unfriendly macro-economic environment overall, but also perhaps by its just in time production model which ran headlong into the global supply chain crisis. It may have had specific corporate reasons for its troubles as well, but it’s also possible to argue that it’s symbolic of the pressures facing the online furniture business.Look no further than Wayfair, which recently celebrated its 20th anniversary, but is now embarked on a big push to try to stabilize and turn around what once looked to be a thriving concern. Co-founder and CEO Niraj Shah argues that since its beginnings, the firm has had a vision of creating a premier online shopping destination for the home:We've got big and bold every step along the way, and for nearly a decade, we were able to self-fund our growth as we reinvested operating profits back into the business…In the decade since 2011, we've grown the business by nearly twentyfold and made meaningful investments in building out our catalog, customer file, geographic presence, logistics platform and more. With the size and scale we've achieved, we are now in a position where we can operate the business for both profitability and growth and are well on our way to returning to a state of self-funding once more.But there’s a but and that’s the harsh reality that the prevailing consumer climate has become less than friendly in a relatively short space of time. Shah explains:Inflation persists quite broadly and with spending pressure across the spectrum of discretionary goods, we continue to see shoppers being very discerning about where their next dollars are going. For much of the summer months, that discretionary spend shifted from goods to services, with pressure felt across a wide array of retail sectors, including ours. While interest in the broad home category remains, we are seeing shoppers being more deliberate with their spending patterns as they seek out great value and wait for promotions.He adds that he’s confident Wayfair can find its way through this:I think what we're seeing in customer behavior is that customers are responding well and as we would have expected to what we're doing in relation to the macro-environment. So if we look at the macro-environment and we see customer sentiment low, we see excess goods, we know the playbook for that…we know how to run that playbook.Some things haven’t change, he argues:Our competitors are the same set of competitors. There's a long tail of competitors. So we have a few sort of large competitors, and then a long tail of folks in the category. I do think when we talk about the macro-tailwinds though, I do think there are some things that through the cycle of COVID kind of hurt us. I try to talk about the big three sometimes, but they're basically product availability got pretty bad for a period of time. The speed positioning, the forward position of goods got quite bad. And then retail got quite bad. The combination of how inflation was passed through and the lack of forward positioning, if you think about that, that kind of erodes an offer.Well, where are we now? We're now reasonably far into a cycle, which is reversing those things. We've gotten all-time highs on speed, and that's continuing to climb at a fast rate. Availability has recovered quite nicely, and that actually has still nice headroom ahead of it, that we have very good insight into, and retail prices have been falling quite nicely…So there's sort of these things that are playing out quite well. We feel very good about our position, both as a home retailer and the bespoke things we're doing, and then specifically on these core elements of the offer and particularly where we are relative to where we were a year ago due to the kind of these external forces that were far out of our control.Keep calm and carry on, appears to the underlying message:I think that this environment is going to be here for a little while. It's not something that's going to go away. The amount of excess inventory is going to also take a little bit of time to work through. So, you can think about this environment lasting, I would probably say, a small number of quarters. But it's not weeks or shorter months…Over our 20-year history, we've seen several economic cycles. One thing that [co-founder] Steve [Conine] and I have learned is that moments like this present an opportunity to set ourselves up for continued success as a category leader. One irony is that this is when we're at our best. We built this business with no outside capital and [against] very well-funded competitors. We know how to win by being both lean and focused.But the competitive landscape is become more difficult, insists Laura Alber, CEO at Williams Sonoma, and demands more focus on differentiation of offering:The macro-environment or the competitive environment has always been promotional. When you really go back and you think about it, even before all these new start-ups came about, there was Macy's always in the home business, and a lot of other big players, and then Amazon came along and Wayfair. They’ve always been after price first. What we do versus them is very different. We’re designing our own goods and we've been doing it for a lot of years. So, we tend to be first with new trends and able to bring out finishes that others can't replicate. Even when they try to copy us, they can't replicate. When you actually go and look at the difference between our furniture or even our tabletop or any of the categories versus theirs, you're going to see a big difference in quality and the resulting price. Even with their markdowns, our value is better.But that’s a high-minded view that isn’t immune to commercial reality. Alber admits:There's always a few exceptions. There's always a few opening price points that I wish were sharper. Those are the opening price points of the place that I want to get back to, be more competitive as we were pre-pandemic. Those are the areas where I think everybody got a little too high. But in total, I really don't think it's a competitive pricing issue, because it's hard to match our goods against anyone else's goods.Now, in terms of inventory in the channel, Bed Bath & Beyond has a ton of inventory that they're pressing, and going to continue to press, deep markdowns. Again, different products, but will that hurt everybody on the fringes? That one might be the biggest factor going. But the Wayfair and the Amazon, those guys are the biggest out there, it's a very different business. So you might buy one thing from them for your garage or something, but you're not going to furnish your living room, your full bedroom from some of those brands. Our customer won’t anyways, because what they're looking for is a much higher quality level and design sensibility, and they want someone to help them put it together.But those customers are in a different state of mind, something that can’t be ignored. Alber admits consumers are nervous, but insists people still love their homes and want to improve them:The sentiment is still,  'I want a nicer home, I want a second home, I want a bigger home'. Now they're not going to buy one, because nobody wants to buy right now. That doesn't mean that you don't still love your home, you don't want to still spend money on it. A lot of those renovation projects are still lagging from the pandemic when you couldn't even get a refrigerator, right? You still can't get a refrigerator. And so, you're not done with your kitchen, so you're not finishing your kitchen yet.So, it's interesting that those projects are still lagging. In my opinion, there should be still a big upside as they finish those projects and then they go to spruce up the furnishings. Because if you spend a lot of money on your new bathrooms and your new kitchen, which are usually where people go first, generally speaking you buy furniture next. So, it should be a very positive thing for us.What I think is happening right now is more fear than reality, and we'll see what happens and which way that goes. But as I said earlier, our customers are still in really good economic shape. I think they're taking a small pause for a minute as everyone's been talking about.So again, the conclusion is, keep calm and carry on:We just have to make sure that we're not distracted by a short-term blip and that we are all focused on what we've built here and continuing to feed it, which means innovation - innovation in product and service - and continuing to press forward when everyone else is doing duck and cover. It's exciting, even though it's a different hand than we expected to be dealt right now. It's an exciting time to really think about it offensively. What's the company that we want to look like and, again, make improvements to. If this is a recession, what are we going to look like on the other side of it? I think when you saw us come out of '08, we were stronger and we're much stronger coming out of the pandemic. Whatever this is going to be, I would say the same thing, we're going to be much stronger coming out of this, too.Having been stung a few times when buying furniture online, I’m not a huge fan of the sector. Clearly it was one that was always going to benefit from lockdown, but equally obviously it was a business model that was going to run into issues once people were able to get back into showrooms to touch and feel products. The ‘don’t panic’ mentality on show at both Wayfair and Williams Sonoma is commendable up to a certain point. After that point, there’s a need not to trip over the smouldering remains of Made.com. 
Image credit - Pixabay
© Diginomica Limited and its licensors 2013-2023Developed by BRAINSUM.While some companies are suffering losses from excess inventory, others are making bank from it. Liquidity Services fall in the latter category.Liquidators, like Liquidity Services, often buy excess and returned merchandise from retail giants, which they then sell to resellers and regular consumers typically at a much lower price. As retailers’ warehouses pile up with goods that are no longer seeing high demand, tapping liquidators is one of the methods retailers use to make room for other items. Several retailers have recently alerted investors and analysts that their inventory levels climbed as a result of supply chain delays as well as consumer spending shifting away from goods and more towards travel. Target said its product inventories were up 43% from the previous year, while Walmarts increased by 32%. Orders that can’t be canceled or sold at a discount tend to make their way to liquidators — and thanks to this phenomenon, demand for the services liquidators offer has grown significantly, leading to new partnerships and growth.“We have certainly been growing. That’s been going on through the pandemic and even accelerating after the pandemic,” said JD Daunt, chief commercial officer for Liquidity Services. “We find ourselves, Liquidity Services, in a pretty privileged position.” In its most recent earnings, Liquidity Services’ revenue was up 11% year-over-year to $68.3 million. Founded back in 1999, Liquidity Services has worked with hundreds of retailers, including Amazon, Wayfair and Home Depot. Daunt said that Liquidity Services has recently begun working with new retailers, but declined to name specific ones. With the demand Liquidity Services has been getting, the company has even had to turn down deals with other firms.Some retailers are already redirecting the excess inventory to liquidators even before it touches their shelves. “We’ve been approached by several retailers to explore the possibility of selling their inventory before it ever gets to their shelves, in some cases, when it arrives in ports or directly from their distribution centers,” he said. “They don’t want to create a glut or occupy capacity in their facilities that might otherwise be used for the holiday season, the back-to-school season.”Murali Gokki, a managing director in the retail practice at AlixPartners, said the need to offload excess inventory has allowed these liquidators to be picky with who they want to work with and which products they want to take in. That might vary depending on who the liquidator’s core customer is, or what geographic market the company operates in. “With inventory levels going up, now liquidators also have to be thoughtful in terms of where they want to place their bets,” Gokki said. “So they want to go after that the safer bets and it is prudent for them to turn down deals that they think they cannot, in turn, be able to sell to the end consumer.”To keep up with the demand, Liquidity Services has expanded its capabilities. Liquidity Services currently has seven warehouses related to its retail business across North America and is planning to add another one “very soon.” It is also begun offering curbside pickup in one of its Phoenix, Arizona locations, and it plans to roll out this service to all of its facilities.  B-Stock, a software company that essentially functions as a marketplace for excess inventory, has been seeing an uptick in inventory volume, giving its buyers more opportunities to source from the B-Stock platform. B-Stock CEO Marcus Shen said that the number of sellers on its platform is well into the “high hundreds.” The company works with retailers like Walmart, Target, Amazon and GameStop, among others. “We’re certainly seeing more demand from retailers,” Shen said. “Those are folks who are trying to adjust and optimize their businesses accordingly as things change.”Some of the products that B-Stock and Liquidity Services are seeing more of include those in the outdoors, home furnishing and appliance categories. These are categories that trended during the pandemic, but the demand has since died down. Target, for example, has recently said it has too many bulky items like furniture and television.Shen said the company also began seeing an unusual rise in demand for its services in the first half of 2020, in response to temporary store closures and fewer people buying products in stores. When e-commerce skyrocketed months into the pandemic, professional liquidators like Quicklotz Liquidations also benefited from online returns. “We had a record year,” Butch Maltby, the spokesperson for Quicklotz Liquidations, told Modern Retail at that time.AlixPartners’ Gokki said that despite seeing high demand now liquidators need to be selective with the types of initiatives they want to take on, especially if they’re working with a limited amount of capital to run their business.Still, with lead times growing even longer for retailers as supply chain issues persist, Gokki said a lot of companies would rather have inventory and not miss out on sales than the other way around – a scenario that could continue to favor liquidators. “They’re always running on a forecast and projection and many do tend to be optimistic,” he said.Join now to gain access to exclusive content, unlimited articles and more. Visit your account page to modify or renew your subscription.Get Modern Retail's top stories every morning in your email inboxFollow @ModernRetail for the latest news, insider access to events and more.A lot has changed since the 2008 economic downturn in regard to how the industry operatesBy Lisa LacyIllustration By Kiki LjungIn November 2022, Amazon CEO Andy Jassy announced layoffs in the company’s corporate offices by explaining that “the economy remains in a challenging spot.” The news reportedly impacted about 10,000 employees in Amazon’s devices, books and people, and experience and technology (PXT) departments—and Jassy added that cuts will continue in 2023.Amazon is hardly alone. Retailers like Best Buy, Party City, Walmart and Wayfair also announced layoffs in 2022. And a recent survey from job site ResumeBuilder found 61% of companies expect more staff cuts in 2023.But for anyone harking back to the last major recession in 2008, the stakes are far different this time around for consumers and retailers.“Losing your home puts you in a different shopping point of view,” said Juliana Prather, CMO of retail analytics platform Edited. “Today you might see the impact is people are going to buy more accessories and less outfits for weddings because accessories help you use your existing wardrobe more. In 2008, you’re talking about foreclosures.”There’s another key difference between now and 2008: digital technology. And retailers will have to make some adjustments as they contend with the biggest recession of the digital era. The good news, however, is they have plenty of options in their product assortments, store footprints, customer behavior and even virtual worlds as they face these economic headwinds, using tools including basket analysis, which shows what customers are buying, and assortment planning, which helps retailers decide what to sell.‘Recession-resistant’ categoriesOne tactic is to focus on growing private-label brands, which cost less and are therefore attractive to price-conscious consumers.“We continue to hear the brands that have private labels want to grow that business, and the retailers that don’t have it want to expand into it sooner rather than later,” said Brad Jashinsky, director analyst at research firm Gartner, pointing to Walmart and Kroger as examples of brands that have leaned into private labels. (Neither company responded to requests for comment.). “It is such a value-add and a great way for retailers in many categories to be able to have higher margins and then keep prices more competitive.”We will also see multicategory retailers zero in on “recession-resistant” categories, which include products consumers need rather than want, such as grocery, health care and pet goods.Meanwhile, the biggest challenge for retailers and retail marketers will be lower conversion rates and basket sizes, which impact return on ad spend (ROAS). And while steep discounts have helped retailers move excess inventory, they are not sustainable because they impact profit margins, Jashinsky said.“In response to this shift, brands can adjust strategies to match the consumer mindset, including using downturn-friendly messaging to reinforce the value of their products and build loyalty,” said Jason Alan Snyder, global chief technology officer at digital agency Momentum.This will not be welcome news for brands in other product categories like apparel and home goods—especially newer brands looking to make names for themselves—as retailers become less likely to take on risk with unproven products. Zach Weinberg, vp of ecommerce at performance marketing firm Reprise Digital, noted “that may mean a challenge when it comes to a brand gaining shelf space. And that also may mean brands will have some challenges when it comes to launching new items as well.”Jashinsky agreed retailers will be “much, much, much less aggressive” in their expansion plans in 2023. This includes hiring freezes and layoffs, in addition to lowered investment in physical expansion, store refreshes, distribution centers and experiments that are not central to driving profits and revenue.“The media talks a lot about a crypto winter,” he said. “I think this is the retail winter, where it’s time to hunker down and focus on what we know and not make any aggressive bets.”Embracing the metaverseWhile physical expansion is unlikely, we will see development elsewhere as more retailers set up shop in the metaverse in 2023. In fact, Gartner predicts 25% of consumers will spend at least an hour a day in the metaverse for work, shopping and entertainment by 2026.We’ve already seen movement in this space from luxury fashion brands like Gucci, which has partnered with platforms like Roblox to release digital apparel. (Gucci did not respond to a request for comment.) Virtual world Decentraland also hosted its first Fashion Week in 2022, which Snyder said “[marks] an inflection point for fashion” and “harbinger for brands and retail.”He expects to see more brands “step up their game” in 2023 as they treat the metaverse as a commercial platform and growth opportunity.We’ll also continue to see secondhand marketplaces such as Depop, Poshmark, the RealReal and ThredUP grow as retailers embrace recommerce, or recycling old products at lower costs.This is, of course, not a new concept, but will become a “safe bet” for brands in choppy economic waters. Per Snyder, there are multiple advantages for retailers, including less overhead; more competitive pricing—and faster movement—of underperforming products; and immediate value from products offering the best for less.Leaning in to loyaltyAt a time when price-based switching becomes more common, rewarding loyalty—and retaining shoppers—will become a powerful retail defense strategy.Expect to see retailers emphasize their loyalty programs to keep the customers they have and grow basket sizes as a result. Elizabeth Marsten, senior director of strategic marketplace services at performance marketing firm Tinuiti, pointed to Kroger’s Fuel Points program, through which customers earn discounts on gas via their store purchases.In addition, retailers like Instacart and Walmart offer advertisers targeting options for behaviors like past purchase, in category and never purchased, which brands can also use to grow baskets and could lead to promotions or discounts.Loyalty programs also offer opportunities for greater personalization by analyzing data through retail media networks, creating targeted messaging for partner brands based on users’ past behaviors.“On one specific retailer, 96% of all purchases happen with a loyalty card. That data can be leveraged to be more targeted and personal for consumers,” said Jeff Malmad, global head of commerce at media agency Mindshare.Retailers can appeal to price-conscious consumers with more and better experiences, too, which has become increasingly valuable for both brands and consumers. “The result is a significant lift in positive sentiment, engagement, purchasing, trial and retention,” Snyder said.Each Saturday, Lowe’s holds “Weekending at Lowe’s” activities for families at its stores, offering everything from tailgate parties to DIY workshops on tiling a bathroom floor. “And while they’re in our stores doing fun things as a family, odds are they’re going to pick up a few things they need around the home,” said Jen Wilson, svp of enterprise brand and marketing at Lowe’s. “Giving consumers new and interesting ways to interact with your brand doesn’t have to be expensive.”This, too, will boost loyalty and engagement, as will providing innovative methods for consumers to virtually sample, visualize or explore products through channels like AR and wearables.In the end, no matter what happens, it’s important to remember something is better than nothing.“Brands that cease advertising during a recession can suffer long-term negative effects, and when they resume their efforts, it can take years to recover the equity losses they have incurred,” Snyder said. “Marketing accounts for a significant portion of a brand’s equity, so it is crucial to continue investing in advertising, even during difficult economic times.”Jen Wilson, svp of marketing, Lowe’s, on the retailer’s 2023 marketing priorities in a year of economic uncertainty.What are your top priorities for 2023? Why are they on your list?As we continue to navigate a challenging macro environment, there are three top marketing fundamentals that we’ll look to focus on in the year ahead: agility, productivity, and business and consumer insights.  Although we focus on planning quarters and months ahead, being prepared for economic downturn comes from the agility we demonstrate on the weekly and daily turning of the dials. While we are not seeing any softness currently, we have a proven playbook and are ready to respond if we do. We’re also focused on productivity and are constantly looking for opportunities to ensure our brand is working harder than ever. For us, this means having consistency in creative, messaging and media so that every moment is meaningful for our consumers.Finally, we’ll continue to pay very close attention to the broader zeitgeist of consumer demand and impacts on the business. An example being that in a down economic time, consumers will be more likely to spend home improvement dollars on maintenance and repair or smaller refresh projects versus, say, big remodels. Staying in tune with how consumers are feeling frequently allows us to enable the right ideas and messaging that will resonate.  What are the challenges that come with encouraging consumers to spend at a time when they will be less inclined or able to do so?Providing value is key during a time when consumers’ wallets are pinched, and value doesn’t have to mean just lower prices. At Lowe’s, we have activities every Saturday in our stores to help provide households with something fun to do together on the weekends. We call this “Weekending at Lowe’s,” and the activities can vary from a tailgate party to a workshop where kids can create a holiday ornament to a DIY workshop on how to tile a bathroom floor. Giving consumers new and interesting ways to interact with your brand doesn’t have to be expensive. And while they’re in our stores doing fun things as a family, odds are they’re going to pick up a few things they need around the home. What is working for you so far, and what’s not working?We know that providing consumers with value is working, which for us means everything from the “Weekending at Lowe’s” Saturday events or helping to reinforce that we have consumers’ backs with our Lowe’s Price Promise, which is our commitment to be priced right or we’ll match it. Customers want to feel like they have a transparent relationship with a brand that goes above and beyond the wallet—and into their hearts and minds. How has this impacted your road map for 2023?We’ll remain fluid in 2023. We are prepared for multiple states of the economic climate and plan situationally to ensure that the impact is manageable for any scenario.   Jen Wilson, svp of marketing, Lowe’s, on the retailer’s 2023 marketing priorities in a year of economic uncertainty.What are your top priorities for 2023? Why are they on your list?As we continue to navigate a challenging macro environment, there are three top marketing fundamentals that we’ll look to focus on in the year ahead: agility, productivity, and business and consumer insights.  Although we focus on planning quarters and months ahead, being prepared for economic downturn comes from the agility we demonstrate on the weekly and daily turning of the dials. While we are not seeing any softness currently, we have a proven playbook and are ready to respond if we do. We’re also focused on productivity and are constantly looking for opportunities to ensure our brand is working harder than ever. For us, this means having consistency in creative, messaging and media so that every moment is meaningful for our consumers.Finally, we’ll continue to pay very close attention to the broader zeitgeist of consumer demand and impacts on the business. An example being that in a down economic time, consumers will be more likely to spend home improvement dollars on maintenance and repair or smaller refresh projects versus, say, big remodels. Staying in tune with how consumers are feeling frequently allows us to enable the right ideas and messaging that will resonate.  What are the challenges that come with encouraging consumers to spend at a time when they will be less inclined or able to do so?Providing value is key during a time when consumers’ wallets are pinched, and value doesn’t have to mean just lower prices. At Lowe’s, we have activities every Saturday in our stores to help provide households with something fun to do together on the weekends. We call this “Weekending at Lowe’s,” and the activities can vary from a tailgate party to a workshop where kids can create a holiday ornament to a DIY workshop on how to tile a bathroom floor. Giving consumers new and interesting ways to interact with your brand doesn’t have to be expensive. And while they’re in our stores doing fun things as a family, odds are they’re going to pick up a few things they need around the home. What is working for you so far, and what’s not working?We know that providing consumers with value is working, which for us means everything from the “Weekending at Lowe’s” Saturday events or helping to reinforce that we have consumers’ backs with our Lowe’s Price Promise, which is our commitment to be priced right or we’ll match it. Customers want to feel like they have a transparent relationship with a brand that goes above and beyond the wallet—and into their hearts and minds. How has this impacted your road map for 2023?We’ll remain fluid in 2023. We are prepared for multiple states of the economic climate and plan situationally to ensure that the impact is manageable for any scenario.   Adweek is the leading source of news and insight serving the brand marketing ecosystem.
                
                    
                        Let Retail Dive's free newsletter keep you informed, straight from your inbox.
                    
                
            Topics covered: retail tech, e-commerce, in-store operations, marketing, and more.Topics covered: brand launches, expansion opportunities, partnerships, startup trends, funding, and more.Topics covered:  Retail advertising, social media, analytics, personalization, search, video, and more.Topics covered: e-commerce, payment technology, IT, in-store tech, cyber security, and more.Topics covered: supply chain and logistics, sourcing, real estate, merchandising, and more.Adidas is the latest player to signal that the painful adjustment companies have been working on — as they try to match inventory with falling demand — is not over.The company follows Nike, whose Q3 report shook the market. Nike said it was working “aggressively” to clear inventory consumers didn’t want to buy, at least not without discounts. The sneaker giant said then that for the period ending Aug. 31, inventory was up 65% while its gross margin fell by 220 basis points. The latest statements from companies and executives have tempered hopes that brands and retailers might have worked through inventory pileups by the holiday season. The discounting — which is now prevalent, with everyone from Nike to Target to department stores moving increasing promotions to rid themselves of slow-moving inventory — hurts margins, but is aimed at refreshing stock for the holiday season and beyond.It can also keep those companies’ operations and supply chains working smoothly and skirts the costs of holding on to that inventory and storing it for a longer period. In August, for example, Target said it took an 87% hit to operating profits for Q2, most of it stemming from the retailer’s inventory rightsizing efforts. Target CEO Brian Cornell said at the time that the alternative scenario would have entailed costs to store the inventory, as well as cluttered sales floors, and store and supply chain teams burdened with the task of managing the excess inventory. Adidas in Q3 is feeling similar pain. Early results show a drop of 1 percentage point in its margin from last year and a drop of nearly 3 percentage points in its operating margin, while net income fell by more than half, though much of the hit was from one-time costs including the wind-down of its business in Russia.To manage the margin difficulties, Adidas has launched a cost-cutting program aimed at inflation in the company’s value chain and unfavorable currency rates. Adidas said the initiative is meant to "safeguard the company’s profitability in 2023.”In an uncertain period, even the bad news from Adidas and Nike has the effect of providing clarity. As Wedbush analysts said in a note on Adidas’ guidance cut, “The clearest ‘silver lining’ we can see is that the near-term issues in the athletic industry are now out in the open (particularly following last month's disappointing [Nike] print) and numbers have been effectively re-based.”Get the free daily newsletter read by industry expertsShaking up a business can be a sign of innovation, or trouble. For DTC brands, the best move may be found in retail’s oldest playbook.The Canadian brand introduced retail to athleisure. Now Brooks Brothers sells stretch dress shirts and Levi’s owns a yoga business.Subscribe to Retail Dive for top news, trends & analysisGet the free daily newsletter read by industry expertsShaking up a business can be a sign of innovation, or trouble. For DTC brands, the best move may be found in retail’s oldest playbook.The Canadian brand introduced retail to athleisure. Now Brooks Brothers sells stretch dress shirts and Levi’s owns a yoga business.The free newsletter covering the top industry headlinesBookmark content that interests you and it will be saved here for you to read or share later.Bookmark content that interests you and it will be saved here for you to read or share later.Bookmark content that interests you and it will be saved here for you to read or share later.Content added to Red FolderRemoved from Red FolderRetail Holiday NewsletterLeading retailers will rely on four universal truths to overcome overstocked inventory, rising shipping costs, and excessive returns in the new year. By Aaron Cheris, Darrell Rigby, Suzanne Tager, Travis Wibracht,  and Stephanie Koszyk
Brief

The holiday season should be packed with surprises, but not the kind that retailers are facing: excess inventory, rising shipping costs, increasing returns, and more.They are also contending with slowing sales growth: In November, nominal sales growth for Bain-defined retail categories decelerated to 4.8% year over year, from 5.8% in October. This could be a result of cooling inflation, which has been propping up nominal sales.As consumers navigate continued economic uncertainty, their confidence and intent to spend decreased in December, according to Bain’s Consumer Health Index. However, high-income households, which represent around 50% of consumer spending, actually increased in confidence and intent to spend, which could be a bright spot for December sales.US retail sales slowed again in December, contributing to muted holiday growth.In the last few days of the holiday season, retailers are wondering if they can deliver some holiday cheer. Supply chains have broadly improved from last season, which was full of stockouts and delivery delays. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York's Global Supply Chain Pressure Index (GSCPI), which includes key metrics such as shipping prices, delivery times, and backlogs, shows that supply chain stress peaked at 4.3 during last year’s holiday season. It has since fallen to 1.2 this November—still significantly above its long-term average of 0.Today, US supply chains are under pressure from staffing shortages at rail yards and higher trucking rates. What’s more, as retailers and brands plan for the deluge of time-sensitive gift deliveries, they must also grapple with increased costs from FedEx, UPS, and Amazon. Retailers also expect returns to increase this holiday season—adding to reverse logistics complexities.At the same time, many are coping with a massive inventory buildup. In the wake of last season’s inventory woes, most retailers ordered a surplus earlier in the year, guessing, not always correctly, what would be on this year’s holiday shopping lists. However, their plans were thwarted by delivery delays. Last year’s goods eventually came in too late to be sold—and, as the large buffer orders finally arrived, consumer demand started to slow due to skyrocketing inflation and rising interest rates.Thus, inventory levels have ballooned. As of early fall, US retailers were holding an estimated additional $66 billion worth of inventory, or a 21% increase from prepandemic levels in 2019 (see Figure 1). That’s about 26% more than the 2019 holiday season and about 18% of total current inventory across categories. As a result, some retailers are struggling to handle the excess merchandise in their stores and warehouses, and some are flush with inventory that customers don’t want right now.These issues haven’t hit retailers and categories evenly. For instance, apparel retailers are suffering from a glut of athleisure, thanks to the pandemic-induced boom. And some retailers are still contending with delays. West Elm, for example, warns of longer wait times for furniture due to a foam shortage, resulting from the surge in demand during the pandemic and a lack of current supply from weather disruptions.Current levels of inventory, and the ways retailers clear out that inventory, can hurt bottom lines. Discounts decrease margins; packing and holding excess merchandise raises storage costs and pulls cash from the balance sheet; canceling orders incurs penalties and hurts supplier relationships; and liquidating through off-price retailers means earning pennies on the dollar while endangering brand equity. In fact, off-price retailers may no longer be as easy an option. Their inventories in the second quarter were up around 40% from a year earlier, according to our analysis of S&P Capital IQ data.Retailers are already feeling the pain. For instance, Nordstrom estimates gross profits will decrease by $200 million in the second half of 2022 due to markdowns and clearance efforts alone, and Target’s excess inventory offloading contributed to a nearly 90% year-over-year dive in second-quarter profits.Rising interest rates also mean that demand-forecasting errors are more costly. Rates for short-term, investment-grade corporate debt rose around 300 basis points between November 2021 and November 2022, implying that $66 billion in excess inventory is costing retailers $2 billion. To put it in perspective, that’s more than 20% of this year’s estimated $9.12 billion in online Black Friday sales.in excess inventorycost of excess inventory to retailerscost of excess inventory as a portion of estimated online Black Friday salesAs if the strain from excess inventory wasn’t enough, mounting returns are another burden on retailers’ bottom lines. Optoro, a reverse logistics company, estimates that processing a return can cost 66% of the price of the product, putting formidable pressure on already-slim margins. And with e-commerce sales growth set to outpace in-store growth by 12 percentage points year over year this holiday, the problem isn’t going anywhere. Online purchases are 1.4 times more likely to be returned than in-store purchases. The returns conundrum is an unwelcome holiday guest that will likely overstay.Leading retailers are moving swiftly to mitigate the effects of excess inventory, high shipping costs, and exorbitant returns this holiday season. While no retailer will solve every supply chain problem today, acting now will put some retailers in a better position heading into 2023.Clearing inventoriesTo clear overstocked inventories before Santa leaves town, many retailers are hoping to strike the right balance between customer convenience, supply chain resilience, supplier relationships, cost-efficiency, and carbon emissions. While no solution is perfect, they’re taking several actions, including:Managing holiday deliveries and returnsShoppers expect presents to arrive in time for the holidays—and during this time of year, they aren’t as willing to forgive and forget. As the price of fast shipping climbs, leading retailers are taking three actions to deliver on promises while protecting profits.Set realistic and profitable delivery windows. For many retailers, e-commerce sales are growing faster than store sales, but earning lower margins. Leaders are setting realistic and economically sustainable delivery windows to balance costs and supply chain complexity. Where possible, they provide customers with multiple options, such as standard no-rush shipping and expedited shipping for a higher fee. For example, J.Crew charges customers three times as much for expedited shipping than for standard shipping. Others are increasing shipping fees for customers across the board: M.A.C Cosmetics raised fees by approximately 40% from March to December.In addition, some retailers, like Amazon, are passing along rising shipping costs to third-party sellers to improve e-commerce operating margins. The company’s fulfillment fees on third-party sellers have risen approximately 20% since 2021.Steer pickups and returns to stores. Winning retailers are creatively rerouting customer traffic to stores to improve margins, boost sales, and ease supply chain pressure. Many are capitalizing on the increasing consumer interest in buy online, pick up in store (BOPIS), which is expected to grow about 20% in value this year. For instance, CVS is incentivizing holiday shoppers by offering 15% off pickup orders. This bet could pay off: 61% of customers who use BOPIS say they typically purchase additional items.Similarly, retailers are pushing shoppers to make returns in-store. For instance, Zara is charging a fee on previously free mailed returns. By encouraging in-store returns, Zara seems to have minimized any damage to its top line. Other retailers are also rethinking the customer convenience-to-cost trade-off, with 60% leaning toward stricter return policies, per a recent goTRG survey.Partner with third-party logistics (3PL) providers. Some retailers are partnering to boost capacity and smooth shipping snags, particularly in reverse logistics. Overstock is pairing up with UPS to create a painless return experience in which customers can schedule home pickup, without even needing to rebox their items. It’s piloting the service this holiday season—a time when shoppers increasingly look for easy returns to ensure a hassle-free experience for their gift recipients.While retailers can’t solve the current crisis, industry leaders will prepare for the next one through structural changes that transform their supply chains for the future. There’s no silver bullet, but four universal truths can help retailers chart their own unique journeys.1. Manual overrides are tempting, but fix the forecasting algorithms instead.Leading retailers use demand forecasting to minimize the bullwhip effect—a supply chain phenomenon where orders to suppliers have a larger variability than sales to customers. The famous Beer Game supply chain simulation, created in the late 1950s by MIT Sloan Professor Jay Forrester, exemplifies how relying on emotions rather than evidence can lead to inefficiencies like overstocks, poor capacity utilization, and ineffective customer service.While algorithms aren’t perfect (yet), they’re better than manual overrides, which aren’t scalable. Winning retailers will continuously train and improve algorithms as they rely on data-driven sourcing, allocation, and replenishment decisions. Macy’s cites data and analytics as a pivotal reason it avoided the stock surpluses that have recently plagued its competitors.2. Decide where and when to be fast.Free, fast shipping is expensive—so leading retailers will resist the urge to be free and fast simultaneously. Instead, they’ll take a category-based approach, matching Amazon’s speeds where fast delivery matters most, such as groceries. They’ll balance out that investment in other categories, like home furniture, recognizing that most urgent needs can be fulfilled in-store (including BOPIS).These retailers will also alleviate supply chain complexity by redirecting traffic to stores. While some, like Rite Aid and Petco, are already offering cash incentives to store-goers, the next generation of winners will create a differentiated value proposition in-store—with shopping concierge services, product demonstrations, augmented reality-enabled product recommendations, and more.Most important, leading retailers will keep their promises. Shoppers often value predictable delivery more than instant gratification. Breaking delivery promises—particularly during the holidays—can frustrate them and erode loyalty.3. Stop rewarding “buy 3, return 2” behavior.Ease of returns can make or break repeat business. Without compromising on customer convenience, leaders will lower costs and limit the potential for abuse.First, leading retailers will mitigate the need for returns. Retailers such as Walmart, IKEA, and Wayfair allow shoppers to virtually “try on” items using augmented reality (AR) technology. Two-thirds of consumers are less likely to return online purchases when they use AR, having made the right choice initially. In addition, giving customers more information—such as images of apparel on multiple body types, the fit model's measurements, or visible customer reviews—has the extra benefit of differentiating the shopping experience.Second, retailers in some categories can consider offering free returns only in-store and charging shipping fees for mailed-in returns. This helps them avoid reverse shipping costs and pushes shoppers to consider returns at the time of purchase.Finally, when free returns can’t be avoided, winners will use them as a loyalty and data engine. For example, H&M customers can mail returns for free only if they participate in the retailer’s loyalty program.4. Act now. Competitors are already making moves, and inaction today could mean irrelevance tomorrow. To determine where to start, retailers can ask themselves the following questions—and use data and analytics to answer them.Turn your supply chain into a competitive weapon, one that's digital, sustainable and more resilient than ever before. The S&P Capital IQ platform, an offering of S&P Global Market Intelligence, is a single source for a powerful array of financial data, analytics, and research. The web-based platform combines deep information on companies, markets, and people worldwide with robust tools for analysis, idea generation, and workflow management. Learn more at spglobal.com.Bain & Company has included in this document information and analyses based on the sources referenced below as well as our own research and experience. Bain has not independently verified this information and makes no representation or warranty, express or implied, that such information is accurate or complete. Projected market and financial information, analyses, and conclusions contained here are based (unless sourced otherwise) on the information described above, and Bain’s judgments should not be construed as definitive forecasts or guarantees of future performance or results. Neither Bain & Company nor any of its subsidiaries or their respective officers, directors, shareholders, employees, or agents accept any responsibility or liability with respect to this document.“BOPIS Grows Basket Size as Most Consumers Buy Extra Items When Picking-Up In-Store.” PYMNTS.com, April 19, 2022.“Bullwhip Effect.” Beergame.org, March 2, 2019.Button, Danni. “Overstock Makes Clever Move Ahead of Returns Season.” TheStreet, November 11, 2022.“Consumer Returns in the Retail Industry 2021.” National Retail Federation, January 25, 2022.Cramer-Flood, Ethan. “US Click-and-Collect Forecast 2022.” Insider Intelligence, March 9, 2022.Dickler, Jessica. “Don’t Bank on Free Returns: 60% of Retailers Roll Out Stricter Policies.” CNBC, November 25, 2022.Frantz, Gary. “Intermodal Struggles Continue as Congestion, Capacity, Supply Chain Disruptions Persist.” DC Velocity, October 4, 2022.“Full-Price Clothing Retailers Me-Too Off-Pricers with a Packaway Inventory Strategy.” RetailWire, August 29, 2022.Garland, Max. “Walmart's Inventory Glut Recedes.” Retail Dive, November 17, 2022.Hartmans, Avery. “Shoppers Are Expected to Return up to $120 Billion Worth of Holiday Gifts This Year—the Process Is Costly to Retailers, Annoying to Consumers, and Harmful to the Planet.” Business Insider, January 8, 2022.Incandela, Denise. “Walmart Levels Up Virtual Try-On for Apparel with Be Your Own Model Experience.” Walmart, September 15, 2022.Kaziukenas, Juozas. “Amazon Fulfillment Fees Up 30% in Two Years.” Marketplace Pulse, August 17, 2022.Kelly, Brianna. “Target’s Earnings Hit Hard as It Cut Prices to Offload of Excess Inventory.” Minneapolis/St. Paul Business Journal, August 17, 2022.London, Lela. “Virtual Try-On Is More than a Pandemic Trend and These Brands Are Reaping the Rewards.” Forbes, May 20, 2021.Magill, Kate. “How Macy's Has Managed to Avoid Inventory Glut.” Supply Chain Dive, November 1, 2022.Magill, Kate. “Retailers Take Expensive Measures to Clear Inventory Ahead of Peak Season.” Supply Chain Dive, August 30, 2022.Miller, Jen A. “Macy's Plan to Speed Up Its Supply Chain Starts with Inventory Management.” Supply Chain Dive, July 13, 2021.Pantry, Nea. “MAC Cosmetics Review—Must Read This Before Buying.” Honest Brand Reviews, March 31, 2022.“Petco Curbside Pickup.” Petco, accessed December 5, 2022.“Promotions.” Rite Aid, accessed December 5, 2022.“Return Policy & Methods.” H&M, accessed December 5, 2022.“Shipping.” MAC Cosmetics, accessed December 5, 2022.“Shipping & Handling.” J. Crew, accessed December 5, 2022.“Shipping Rate Changes.” FedEx, accessed December 5, 2022.Smith, Talmon Joseph. “As the Fed Raises Rates, Worries Grow about Corporate Bonds.” The New York Times, November 11, 2022.Stambor, Zak. “Black Friday Sales Rise 12% YoY.” Insider Intelligence, November 26, 2022.Sterman, John D. “What the Beer Game Can Teach Us About Hoarding Toilet Paper.” MIT Sloan, May 18, 2020.“Stress Less with Free CVS® Pickup.” CVS, accessed December 5, 2022.Trentmann, Nina, and Kristin Broughton. “Rising Rates Boost Companies' Focus on Working Capital Management.” The Wall Street Journal, November 3, 2022.“Upholstered Furniture Shipping Delays.” West Elm, accessed December 5, 2022.“UPS Shipping Costs and Rates.” UPS, accessed December 5, 2022.Vembar, Kaarin. “Zara Now Charges for Some Returns. Will Other Retailers Follow?” Retail Dive, June 8, 2022.Walk-Morris, Tatiana. “Shoppers Who Use AR Less Likely to Return Purchases: Snap.” Retail Dive, June 21, 2022.“Why Everything Is on Sale: The Bullwhip Effect.” The Wall Street Journal, October 5, 2022.Young, Liz. “Retailers Turning to Specific-Day Delivery over Speediest Shipping.” The Wall Street Journal, November 9, 2022.“Zara Limits Free Returns to In-Store Only, Reports No Impact on Sales.” PYMNTS.com, June 14, 2022.The authors would like to acknowledge Anirudha Sharma, Adam Kowalski, Quinn Creamer, Daniella Valverde, and Darsh Jalan for their contributions to this newsletter.Retailers’ environmental, social, and governance (ESG) progress has the potential to accelerate.
Strategic pricing and focused promotions will benefit retailers and consumers alike.As investments in supply chain resilience rise, leading companies are focusing on these areas.We look at the latest sales data through Thanksgiving weekend and examine how leading retailers are preparing supply chains for a record holiday rush.Not every retailer can build an Amazon-style ecosystem. But every retailer needs its own effective approach in the new year.We work with ambitious leaders who want to define the future, not hide from it. Together, we achieve extraordinary outcomes.Stay ahead in a rapidly changing world. Subscribe to Bain Insights, our monthly look at the critical issues facing global businesses.*I have read the Privacy Policy and agree to its terms.© 1996-2023 Bain & Company, Inc.Contact Bain
                
                    
                        Let Retail Dive's free newsletter keep you informed, straight from your inbox.
                    
                
            Topics covered: retail tech, e-commerce, in-store operations, marketing, and more.Topics covered: brand launches, expansion opportunities, partnerships, startup trends, funding, and more.Topics covered:  Retail advertising, social media, analytics, personalization, search, video, and more.Topics covered: e-commerce, payment technology, IT, in-store tech, cyber security, and more.Topics covered: supply chain and logistics, sourcing, real estate, merchandising, and more.First published onWalmart has had too much inventory relative to demand in some general merchandise categories this year, a reversal of the past two years of scrambling to bring in more products — even by chartered ship. Inflation-weary consumers have been pulling back on discretionary spending this year, leading to slower sales in categories like electronics, home and apparel.The retailer has attacked this glut throughout the year as the majority of extra inventory made its way from the company's supply chain in Q1 to store shelves in Q3. It has already canceled billions of dollars in orders, increased its markdown levels and made targeted category reductions. Other retailers have taken similar measures.Walmart’s merchants have also helped by taking "an item-by-item, category-by-category approach" in buying to balance inventory with demand, Walmart President and CEO Doug McMillon said. Merchant decisions around item quantity are particularly important in an uncertain economic environment."We can be more aggressive on shorter lead time items like food and consumables, but we're especially sensitive to quantity decisions on longer-lead time items that are imported," McMillon said.Walmart expects further improvements in its inventory levels by year's end, even when factoring in inflation."I was in an import center last week, and the inbound is in really good shape," Furner said. “The orders are in line.”Get the free daily newsletter read by industry expertsShaking up a business can be a sign of innovation, or trouble. For DTC brands, the best move may be found in retail’s oldest playbook.The Canadian brand introduced retail to athleisure. Now Brooks Brothers sells stretch dress shirts and Levi’s owns a yoga business.Subscribe to Retail Dive for top news, trends & analysisGet the free daily newsletter read by industry expertsShaking up a business can be a sign of innovation, or trouble. For DTC brands, the best move may be found in retail’s oldest playbook.The Canadian brand introduced retail to athleisure. Now Brooks Brothers sells stretch dress shirts and Levi’s owns a yoga business.The free newsletter covering the top industry headlines
                
                    
                        Let Retail Dive's free newsletter keep you informed, straight from your inbox.
                    
                
            Topics covered: retail tech, e-commerce, in-store operations, marketing, and more.Topics covered: brand launches, expansion opportunities, partnerships, startup trends, funding, and more.Topics covered:  Retail advertising, social media, analytics, personalization, search, video, and more.Topics covered: e-commerce, payment technology, IT, in-store tech, cyber security, and more.Topics covered: supply chain and logistics, sourcing, real estate, merchandising, and more.From Toys R Us to J.C. Penney, many retailers have filed over the past few years. Here’s who has fallen victim since 2017.Since 2017, Retail Dive has tracked major bankruptcies in the U.S. retail industry. Over the years, we’ve chronicled the long decline of once-dominant chains like Sears, and the unexpected and swift demise of others, like Lord & Taylor. Even in that short timeframe, some retailers have fallen victim to bankruptcy not once, but twice. In 2019 alone, both Gymboree and Payless filed for their second bankruptcies in two years. And in 2020, with many retailers facing shuttered stores and slow traffic, a record number of retailers — including many who had been teetering for years — filed. Some retailers that enter bankruptcy leave most of their stores behind, opting for a more digital-focused approach, while others are bought out by landlords and continue to operate large footprints. Some brands disappear entirely, while others seem to resurrect again and again. After Toys R Us’ swift liquidation in 2018, for example, the iconic toy brand is now sold at Macy’s.The state of bankruptcies says a lot about the health of the retail sector and the various categories it serves. Which retailers file in a given year provides clues about broader consumer trends and gives insight into the differences between retail’s winners and losers.Retail Dive will continue to update this tracker with the latest major retail bankruptcies. These entries provide information on when major retailers filed, the reasons behind the filing and what their plans were at the time.Keep up with the story. Subscribe to the Retail Dive free daily newsletterTuesday Morning filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in February. At the time of its filing, the Dallas-based company said it secured a $51.5 million debtor-in-possession commitment from Invictus Global Management to support the company’s operations during the case.As part of the reorganization, the company expects to shrink its store footprint by more than half, to 200 locations. Tuesday Morning had nearly 500 stores in 40 states last November and about 6,300 full- and part-time workers at that time. The company previously filed for bankruptcy in 2020. In its 2023 Chapter 11 filing, Tuesday Morning had liabilities and assets of between $100 million to $500 million. The parent company of Chuck & Don’s, Loyal Companion, Kriser’s and Natural Pawz, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in February.As part of the restructuring, the company plans to exit its Loyal Companion and Natural Pawz brands and shut down its existing stores on the East Coast, Texas and California. The company will continue to run under its Chuck & Don’s and Kriser’s brands. The retailer began liquidating 93 of its stores on Feb. 3.“This change allows us to create a stronger foundation for our team and our pet parent communities in our core go-forward brands and markets,” Independent Pet Partners wrote on LinkedIn.Party City Holdco in January filed for Chapter 11. It’s seeking a $150 million debtor-in-possession loan. A judge on Jan. 18 granted the company immediate access to $75 million of the loan.The pandemic tanked consumer demand for the company’s mainstay items – costumes, decorations and party favors – when people canceled in-person celebrations. In court documents, Party City said it has liabilities and assets of $1 billion to $10 billion and 10,001 to 25,000 creditors. The company says an “expedited restructuring” would reduce debt and improve liquidity.Party City has over 800 company-owned and franchised stores. The franchised stores, the company’s Anagram balloon business and subsidiaries outside the U.S. are not part of the bankruptcy case.Beauty accelerator Forma Brands – the owner of Morphe, Playa Beauty and more – filed for bankruptcy one week after announcing the closure of all U.S. Morphe retail locations. The filing included a proposed acquisition deal with lenders in which creditors would provide $33 million in funds to take over its wholesale operations, online platforms and international Morphe retail stores.In court documents, Forma revealed it has about $868 million of funded principal debt and interest obligations. The company noted that it began experiencing “liquidity and operational issues a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, widespread changes to consumers’ beauty habits and their need to terminate partnerships with certain influencers.”Sears Hometown Stores filed for bankruptcy in December in the middle of tussling with its parent, TransformCo, also known as “new Sears.” The home goods-focused chain, an offshoot of the once-iconic retail giant, has about 121 stores in 26 states and Puerto Rico, including locations run by independent dealers. That’s down from nearly 500 when “new Sears” reacquired it shortly after its own bankruptcy four years ago.Bankruptcy became necessary in part because Sears Hometown relies “substantially on TransformCo to provide key products and services,” including inventory, which TransformCo failed to provide, according to a bankruptcy court filing from Sears Hometown CEO Elissa Robertson. In 2019, former Sears CEO Eddie Lampert and his ESL financial firm stymied an effort to liquidate Sears Hometown, replacing two board members and changing its bylaws.Medly, founded in 2017, sells medical prescriptions online and through stores in seven states, calling itself the “nation's fastest-growing digital pharmacy.” About a year after expanding through its acquisition of Colorado-based pharmacy chain Pharmaca, Medly in December filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, stating in court documents that its “working capital has dissipated to the point where the Company will be unable to continue operations.” The company also said it “has contacted potential acquirers to discuss potential acquisitions.” In its filing, Medly lists assets and liabilities of between $100 million and $500 million each.What you need to know: Olympia Sports filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in September after starting a full store liquidation process over the summer. At the time of the filing, CEO Mark Coffey said the company chose to enter bankruptcy in order to retain employees and keep operations going as it wound down its footprint.The sporting goods chain, which was founded in 1975 in Portland, Maine, once operated over 230 stores, but ran just 35 stores when it filed. All of those stores were set to close by Sept. 30, 2022. Olympia Sports was acquired by private equity firm CriticalPoint Capital through its JackRabbit running specialist business in 2019.Iconic beauty company Revlon filed for Chapter 11, citing its burdensome capital structure, which includes over $3 billion in debt. It also pointed to struggles with its supply chain and inflation. Revlon CEO Debra Perelman, daughter of Ron Perelman, said that the filing would provide a “clearer path for our future growth” as it addresses its capital structure. “If executed effectively, Revlon could emerge from bankruptcy with a cleaner balance sheet and a better operating profile, improving longer term business prospects,” David Silverman, retail senior director with Fitch Ratings, said in emailed comments. With a past history of financial duress exacerbated by the pandemic, Escada America filed for bankruptcy in January with immediate plans to close five locations, or roughly half its footprint.The company, which is the U.S. retail arm of the Escada women's fashion brand, also blamed inflexible landlords for the need to file. Rather than litigate over leases, the company aims to shed stores and repay creditors while avoiding "a senseless and unnecessary liquidation."By 2010, some six years after its founding in 2004, Alex and Ani’s wire charm bracelets were a hit, steadily fueling sales for the following five years. But troubles began to brew in 2014, when top executives came and went at a rapid pace, disrupting the jewelry retailer’s momentum, according to court documents filed with the bankruptcy court of Delaware.Founder and ex-CEO Carolyn Rafaelian, who owned the company until 2012 when she sold a stake to private equity, has agreed to a resolution of her own legal claims against the company and part-owner Lion Capital, pending the bankruptcy court’s approval. Under the agreement, she would also sell her remaining 35% stake, per the court files.The retailer is swimming in about $127.4 million in outstanding funded debt obligations. The full effect of a 2019 out-of-court restructuring was stymied by a ransomware attack in February 2020 and then the pandemic. Alex and Ani already has a restructuring support agreement with its debt holders and equity sponsors for a financial and operational restructuring, which must be approved by the court, and is looking for a buyer. The retailer plans to keep operations going during the bankruptcy process, including stores “currently open;” about 25 remain closed due to COVID-19. Furthermore, the company says it will look to exit any leases deemed “uneconomic.”Founded in 2001, The Collected Group brought together three fashion brands: Joie (launched that same year), Equipment and Current/Elliott. Operational woes led to a change in private equity owners in 2018 after KKR converted its debt holdings to equity in an out-of-court restructuring. In the years following, the women’s fashion specialist invested in e-commerce and its wholesale channels, boosting profits. But the pandemic landed hard on fashion apparel and brick-and-mortar shopping. Even before filing for bankruptcy, The Collected Group decided to wind down its physical footprint, which included 33 stores at its largest. In filing for bankruptcy, The Collected Group aimed to reduce debt, complete its brick-and-mortar wind-down and restructure around its growing e-commerce business and wholesale.In early March 2020, Paper Source announced a major expansion after acquiring 30 prime store locations from a fallen rival, the stationery and paper goods specialist Papyrus, as that retailer wound down. Later that month, the world turned on its head as the COVID-19 pandemic sparked stay-at-home orders and mass temporary store closures, including all of Paper Source’s stores. The company had been healthy and growing before the public health crisis. But the sales decline for the year led to liquidity constraints as rent bills piled up. In March, the retailer filed for bankruptcy with a plan to close at least 11 stores and sell itself. On filing, it had a credit bid from current lenders to serve as a stalking horse in a proposed Chapter 11 auction of the company.Belk was among those retailers especially vulnerable when the COVID-19 crisis hit. Saddled with nearly $2 billion in debt, a legacy of a leveraged buyout, the southern department store chain’s liquidity fell by 70% last April. The retailer, while working toward a digital transformation, also is heavily dependent on store traffic; its sales fell 32% between March and December 2020. To buttress its finances, the company forged an agreement with lenders that allowed it to shed $450 million in debt, push out maturities, get new capital and let private equity sponsor Sycamore Partners retain majority ownership. The deal, according to the company, hinged on a lightning-quick trip through bankruptcy court. Belk aimed for 24 hours between filing and emerging, reaching out to creditor groups to gain their buy-in. A federal bankruptcy judge signed off on the deal, clearing the way for a speedy exit from Chapter 11 despite alarms raised by the U.S. trustee assigned to the case.With 66 retail stores, Solstice Sunglasses bills itself as the second-largest specialty retailer of sunglasses in the U.S., focusing on high-end brands like Dior, Gucci, Jimmy Choo, Kate Spade and Ray Ban. The luxury boutique said in a press release that it had been hit financially by the COVID-19 pandemic, with sales down more than 50% from 2019 and “limited relief to compensate for stores being closed and shoppers afraid or unable to shop.” The company filed for Chapter 11 in February with the aim of reorganizing and emerging from bankruptcy intact as a going concern. Solstice hired RCS Real Estate Advisors to evaluate its lease footprint but did not immediately say if or how many stores it planned to close. At the time of filing, Solstice CEO Mikey Rosenberg said in a statement that his team was “optimistic about reorganization as we continue to see increasing business in our stores as COVID restrictions are lifted and in the new fashions that our vendors are providing.”Like many retailers since the pandemic began, the U.S. arm of L’Occitane found itself with declining brick-and-mortar sales and expensive leases on the one hand, and rapidly growing online sales on the other. The managing director for the beauty brand’s North American region said that its lease obligations amount to $30.3 million annually across its 166-store footprint. With brick-and-mortar sales falling 56.5% year over year in the months between April and December, the burden of those costs ballooned very suddenly. The company, whose parent was founded in 1976 in Manosque, France, filed for Chapter 11 with immediate plans to close 23 stores and restructure around a smaller footprint and its digital business.Founded in 1956, women’s apparel seller Christopher & Banks specializes in value-priced women’s apparel and targets smaller markets with a pre-bankruptcy store footprint just shy of 450. The COVID-19 pandemic took a huge toll, decreasing demand among its core customer and adding stress to its finances. The company was facing eviction from some stores and, in January, defaulted on key loans and the lease on its headquarters. Christopher & Banks filed for Chapter 11 in mid-January with plans to close all of its stores and sell off its e-commerce business. An affiliate of Hilco Merchant Resources, and a lender to Christopher & Banks, emerged as a stalking horse bidder on its digital business.Created last year out of some of the parts of the liquidated Art Van Furniture, Loves Furniture immediately ran into problems. For one, it was without a permanent logistics hub, with another company picking up Art Van’s Michigan Warehouse. Loves contracted with a third-party logistics company, but said later that shipping issues left its stores less than ready when they opened. Issues getting orders to customers deepened the company’s problems, hurting its sales and, with them, its underlying financials. The logistics provider sued Loves after the retailer fell behind on its payments. It filed for bankruptcy in January in hopes of restructuring around a smaller footprint. In 2019, Francesca’s shook up its C-suite, hunted for a suitor, went on a cost-cutting mission and planned to shift to a fast-fashion model. Instead of working on a turnaround, however, the retailer spent much of 2020 issuing going concern warnings and permanently closing stores as the pandemic slammed its sales and roiled its plans.But the pandemic wasn’t it’s only problem. The retailer, which runs smaller-than-average stores, had been struggling for a while as apparel sales growth ebbed and fewer consumers shopped at malls. A day after its bankruptcy filing, the Nasdaq warned its stock would be delisted on Dec. 15 — something Francesca’s wouldn’t appeal since its investors are taking it private.TerraMar has committed to keeping at least 275 Francesca’s stores open, out of the 558 it was running at the time of its Chapter 11 filing after closing dozens in recent years.Founded in 1959 as a single store selling organs, Guitar Center eventually became the largest musical instrument retailer in the U.S., with more than 500 stores across its brands. After a private equity buyout, it struggled under its debt load throughout the 2010s.When the pandemic forced it to close its stores, Guitar Center ran into liquidity problems. After striking a deal with bondholders during the summer, the company forged an agreement with key lenders and equity holders to restructure the company’s debt and capital structure in Chapter 11.Founded in 1984, Furniture Factory Outlet ran nearly 70 stores in the Midwest and south central U.S. before the pandemic. As the year started, it was making progress on a turnaround, according to its CFO. But the pandemic forced it to lay off 95% of its staff and permanently shutter more than half its footprint amid the financial tumult. Its supply chain has also been upended by the pandemic, hurting its revenue and further constraining liquidity.Owned by private equity firm Sun Capital Partners, the retailer filed for bankruptcy in November with a $7 million bid to take it over from home goods retailer American Freight.Century 21 has been a favorite retailer for six decades, especially among New Yorkers. The company’s headquarters and downtown flagship were destroyed in the 9/11 terrorist attacks. When it was rebuilt at the site of the devastation, it stood as a symbol of the city’s endurance.The retailer was an early entrant in the off-price game, opening its doors in 1961 and selling high-end apparel for savvy fashionistas. While the likes of TJX Cos., Ross and Burlington have downplayed or avoided e-commerce in order to preserve their store-based treasure hunts and protect their margins, Century 21 ran a website to reach customers beyond the four states where it operates.Insurance payments helped the company recover from the destruction in New York 19 years ago, but some $175 million in claims related to the pandemic have been denied, forcing the retailer to close down, according to a statement last week from Century 21 co-CEO Raymond Gindi, a son of the founders.With support of its lenders through the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York, going-out-of-business sales have commenced at all stores in New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Florida and through its website, the company said last week in court documents.Stein Mart’s downward swing in fortunes over 2020 has been dramatic. After years of declining sales and negative profit, it opened the year with a takeover deal by a private equity firm and an entity controlled by its chairman. But the spread of COVID-19, and the ensuing turmoil in the retail industry and financial markets, threw a wrench into those plans. The deal was nixed, by mutual agreement.Not long after, Stein Mart added language to its regulatory filings acknowledging it might not be able to survive as a going concern as COVID-19 upended the industry. The retailer did see traffic increases after reopening its stores, and was able to land a $10 million loan from the federal government’s stimulus package.But events took another downward turn. COVID-19 surged in Texas, Florida and California, along with other states and areas in the U.S. Those three major states account for some 40% of Stein Mart’s stores and led to another crash in finances. Internal projections showed the retailer would soon run out of cash to operate its business.The retailer filed for Chapter 11 with dim hopes for a savior to come along to buy part or all of its business. Barring that outcome — which even the CEO acknowledges is unlikely given the retail market and past unsuccessful efforts to sell itself — Stein Mart is set to liquidate its stores and sell off any assets of value, including its intellectual property and e-commerce operations.The oldest department store in the U.S. last year was acquired by one of the newest e-retailers, an online apparel rental site, for $75 million. The tie-up was seen, warily by some, as promising for both — Lord & Taylor stores would provide Le Tote with the singular marketing that only brick and mortar can provide, while Le Tote would bring Lord & Taylor new, younger customers. The pandemic, and the temporary closures it forced onto nonessential retailers, ensured that the experiment wouldn’t be given a chance to work, however. Privately owned Le Tote in court documents said it notched about $253.5 million in revenue last year, but in April the company announced layoffs of most its workers at both its namesake company and at Lord & Taylor. The company employs 651, and arrived at bankruptcy court with funded debt obligations of about $137.9 million. The real estate arm of previous owner Hudson’s Bay Co. is its largest shareholder, with a 27.6% interest.Tailored Brands, which owns Men’s Wearhouse, Jos. A. Bank, Moores Clothing for Men and K&G, entered into a restructuring agreement supported by over 75% of its senior lenders. This was after months of warnings from the company that it might have to terminate operations or seek bankruptcy protection due to dramatic sales declines brought on by COVID-19. The retailer was struggling prior to the pandemic. Revenues had declined by 5.6% over the past two years, and the company pointed to the casualization of the American office and “the continuing decline in the brick-and-mortar retail industry generally” as primary pain points. As part of a go-forward plan, the company expects to reduce corporate staff, the number of retail locations, and its supply chain infrastructure.A few Ascena brands — tween label Justice and plus brands Lane Bryant and Catherines — along with the very idea of selling to any and all women at all stages of life, came from Les Wexner’s former L Brands empire. Wexner eventually abandoned them, and that vision. Ascena may be finding out why.The COVID-19 pandemic no doubt sped up Ascena’s restructuring — just a few months ago it denied a bankruptcy was in the cards. But it’s hard to pin its woes on that recent shock alone. Ascena’s original business, Dressbarn, never recovered after encountering headwinds years ago, its newer brands were already in trouble when they were acquired, and the multi-brand nature of the enterprise has been unwieldy for some time. The retailer will come out of the process much smaller. Its stable will shrink dramatically, with massive store closures expected (though not yet enumerated). That includes all locations of the Catherine’s plus-size banner, which is being sold to online plus retailer City Chic. With discount brands Dressbarn and Maurices already gone as of last year, the retailer therefore places its hope of a comeback on premium brands Ann Taylor and Loft and plus-size stalwart Lane Bryant. But the challenges it faced before the pandemic — notably the sales declines of those labels and of apparel sales growth more broadly — await.Founded in 1964 by Robert Anderson, The Paper Store has stayed in the Anderson family ever since and stayed close to its New England home. Now it is looking to sell itself after joining the ranks of other gift specialists to go bankrupt in recent years, including the parent of Papyrus as well as Things Remembered.The retailer — which sells stationery, jewelry, home decor as well as fashion, sports and other products — blamed its financial distress on everything from the calendar to weather to football to, of course, COVID-19. The Paper Store voluntarily closed its stores in March and kept them closed through key selling periods, including Easter and Mother’s Day. With unpaid rent and vendor payables mounting, the retailer wasn’t able to cut costs deeply enough to stay out of court, even after slashing its workforce down to a skeleton crew. In bankruptcy, the retailer hopes a buyer steps up for the company, and quick, to ensure its shelves are stocked ahead of the all-important holiday season. A restructuring adviser to the company said a group that includes one of The Paper Store’s creditors has expressed interest in making a stalking horse bid.RTW Retailwinds, owner of the New York & Co. banner along with Fashion to Figure, and Happy x Nature brands, was losing sales and closing stores well before the COVID-19 crisis began. But the pandemic put tremendous strain on the apparel seller’s finances and operations. With its stores closed and revenue in free fall, RTW went into default with landlords, vendors and its bank, Wells Fargo. In April, its CEO-elect resigned unexpectedly, shortly after being appointed, along with four of the company’s board directors. In June, the retailer said that a bankruptcy was “probable,” and later disclosed it may have to close all of its stores in a Chapter 11 scenario.When the company did file for Chapter 11 in July, it planned to close “a significant portion, if not all” of its physical stores. It also was evaluating a sale of the company’s e-commerce business and related intellectual property. Muji USA was formed in 2006 as a subsidiary of a Japan-based conglomerate that operates retail stores, campsites, cafes, hotels, model house builders and multiple other sectors, selling upwards of 7,000 products. The Muji brand was founded in Japan in 1980 as “an antithesis to the habits of consumer society at that time,” according to Muji USA’s chief restructuring officer, John Bittner, a senior managing director with Mackinac Partners. “On one hand, foreign-made luxury brands were gaining popularity within an economic environment of ever-rising prosperity,” Bittner said in court papers. “On the other hand, poor-quality, low-priced goods were appearing on the market and had a polarizing effect on consumption patterns.” Muji became a “critique” of this state of things, with the aim of selling “products that are useful for the customer and maintain an ideal of the proper balance between living and the objects that make it possible,” Bittner added.Minimalist stores, low prices and an array of products including home goods, beauty, apparel, food and more drew lines to some of Muji’s store openings in the U.S. A New York Times writer once called the retailer’s SoHo store “gloriously affordable.”By the end of 2019, the U.S. subsidiary had more than 20 stores, and it was in financial trouble after overexpanding and picking high-rent spaces in choice locations. At the end of the year, it had a negative cash balance of $26.5 million in its loan arrangement with its parent, according to Bittner. The COVID-19 pandemic would force the company to close all of its stores, deepening its woes. In bankruptcy, Bittner said the company aims to close some stores to rightsize its footprint, restructure its operations and grow its online presence. Muji USA plans to exit bankruptcy within six months.Brooks Brothers for the last nearly two decades has been run by Claudio Del Vecchio, who appreciates its 202-year-old history and its reputation for style and quality. But in that time, casual wear has become increasingly more acceptable for the white-collar professionals who are its customer base.The pandemic has tamped down demand further as people continue to work from home, interrupting a turnaround plan that has included seeking a buyer willing and able to provide the necessary resources. That’s still the plan, and analysts say the retailer should be able to easily find a new owner, thanks to brand strength that has endured for more than two centuries despite the upheaval in apparel sales. WHP Global, Authentic Brands Group and Simon Property Group — the latter recently retracted a lawsuit over unpaid rent — have all been named in press reports as potential suitors.Since its founding in Seattle’s Pike Place Market in 1972, Sur La Table has grown steadily. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, it had 126 stores along with a relatively robust e-commerce arm and fast-growing, revenue-generating cooking classes. But over the five years leading up to its bankruptcy, the kitchenware specialist suffered revenue declines and a churn of executives. The CEO who authored the company’s first day declaration was the company’s third since 2017. It also had capital expenses from installing commercial-level kitchens for its classes and debt leftover from a leveraged buyout. The pandemic crisis deepened Sur La Table’s troubles and brought threats and eviction proceedings from landlords. The company filed with a plan to close more than 50 stores and sell itself to what would be a third private equity owner in nearly 15 years, a deal that would keep the company, including a pared-down physical retail presence, intact.Founded in 1989, G-Star Raw credits itself with introducing “luxury denim for the streets.” Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, the company operated 31 stores in the U.S., with a flagship on Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills, California. Like scores of other retailers, G-Star had to close its stores when the pandemic hit the U.S., and has since determined to reduce its footprint to around seven stores (though that number could change if landlords are willing to swallow “significant concessions”), according to the company’s CEO. Along with the financial pain of the closures, G-Star’s stores suffered “looting during a period of civil unrest” in May and June. In bankruptcy, G-Star hopes to pare its footprint and emerge focused on its remaining profitable stores. The company has no secured debt, but rather a revolving credit account with its Netherlands-based parent.Lucky Brand was one of two denim specialists to file for bankruptcy in a single day in July. Founded in 1990, the brand and retailer eventually grew to have more than 100 stores and 98 outlets in North America. As the story goes with so many retailers, debt — leftover from a leveraged buyout years earlier — left the company burdened as challenges mounted on store retail and apparel in particular. The COVID-19 pandemic exacerbated those challenges. Executive Chairman Matthew Kaness said at the time of filing that the pandemic and its effects have “severely impacted sales across all channels,” and that business has not fully recovered yet. Liquidity strains from store closures related to the pandemic also disrupted the company’s ability to supply its stores with new inventory. Lucky Brand filed for Chapter 11 with plans to jettison about a dozen unprofitable stores and sell itself for at least $140 million. Going into bankruptcy it had a bid from licensing conglomerate Authentic Brands Group and one of the operating companies Authentic Brands works with.Founded in the middle of the Great Depression, the nutrition store chain that would become GNC is no stranger to economic calamity. But, after years of falling sales trying to trim its debt, the COVID-19 pandemic and economic disruption that came with it proved too much to manage outside of bankruptcy.GNC entered bankruptcy with plans to close up to 1,200 stores. It also had multiple parties willing to take it over. Key lenders agreed to a reorganization plan that would turn over ownership to them. On filing, GNC also had a $760 million offer, agreed to “in principle,” from its largest shareholder, the China-based Harbin Pharmaceutical Group. The alternate plans indicate that multiple parties see value in the retailer’s business and are willing to put up capital to save it.On a February conference call, executives at Tuesday Morning made no mention of financial distress or bankruptcy. The off-pricer had issues, to be sure. The company posted net losses for three years running and added only modest growth to its top line. But when the COVID-19 crisis hit in March, the retailer — much smaller than peers like TJX Cos and Ross Stores — watched as its sales went to nearly nothing after it closed its stores.The company called the pandemic disruption an “insurmountable financial hurdle” that forced it into bankruptcy. The company filed for Chapter 11 with hopes of reorganizing around a footprint about a third smaller than its roughly 700 or so stores. Yet Tuesday Morning did not have a negotiated plan with lenders going into bankruptcy court, leaving the ultimate outcome open-ended for now.Centric’s own brands include Hudson, Robert Graham, Swims, Zac Posen and Avirex. The company also licenses more than 100 well known labels, including Calvin Klein, Tommy Hilfiger, Nautica, Hudson Jeans and Under Armour in apparel; Kate Spade, Michael Kors, All Saints and Jessica Simpson in accessories; and Disney, Marvel, Nickelodeon and Warner Brothers in entertainment. With apparel sales growth down and department stores in decline in recent years, the apparel and accessories brands in particular were no doubt already under pressure when the COVID-19 disease broke out worldwide. CEO Jason Rabin said in a statement that the “pandemic disrupted many of our wholesale accounts’ ordering and constrained our cash flow” but also that the agreement forged with the company’s lenders ahead of its Chapter 11 filing positions it for long-term success.Centric will emerge from Chapter 11 as a private company. Debtor-in-possession financing of $435 million will allow it “to operate without interruption throughout the restructuring process,” according to a company press release.After years of trying to engineer a lasting turnaround with mounting losses and constant sales declines, bankruptcy speculation turned into bankruptcy reality for the 118-year-old retailer. Executives painted a picture of a company on the mend until the COVID-19 crisis hit, but J.C. Penney’s challenges were numerous, hefty and persistent well before the pandemic.Still, the pandemic hurt. According to the company’s CFO, sales in April were down 88% year over year and store sales approached zero as Penney closed its stores temporarily while the pandemic spread through the U.S. It also derailed talks with lenders that may have helped it manage its balance sheet outside of a court process.The retailer filed for Chapter 11 with support from key lenders for a plan. But even that pre-negotiated plan allows for multiple outcomes: re-organization with debt relief, a potential sale, or liquidation if the company can’t agree on a go-forward business plan with key lenders in July or if it can’t win third-party financing as it preps an exit. Even so, executives project optimism about the retailer’s future, saying Chapter 11 will allow it to make good on turnaround plans and unveiling plans to reduce Penney’s store footprint by nearly a third.After a booming third quarter, Stage Stores went into a financial tailspin shortly after the year started. Its holiday sales fell below expectations, perhaps by a lot. The missed targets led to a liquidity crunch, as well as layoffs, store closures and diminished plans for its conversion to an off-pricer.The owner of the Bealls, Palais Royal, Peebles, Stage and Goody’s department stores announced last year it would convert its remaining stores to its Gordmans model. That was based on encouraging data from stores it had already converted to Gordmans. But the holiday shortfall wrecked those plans. The company at one point considered a store footprint 200 stores smaller than what it planned as recently as the fall, sources told Retail Dive earlier this year.Stage Stores closed its stores this spring after the COVID-19 crisis hit, squeezing liquidity further and acting as the “proverbial ‘nail in the coffin,’” the company’s chief restructuring officer said later in court papers. Wells Fargo also reduced the retailer’s available borrowings under its revolver; meanwhile Stage Stores was hunting for new capital. But none materialized in time.The retailer filed for bankruptcy with plans to liquidate its business entirely, unless a buyer steps up by June to buy the company and keep it operating.The Canadian Aldo Group shoe seller runs 429 stores and has 3,300 employees in the U.S. The company’s vice president of finance, David Galarneau, called the U.S. “instrumental in the company’s climb to recognition,” with its first store opening in the country in 1993. But both the parent company and U.S. business have been in decline. Aldo U.S. posted a net loss of $52.8 million for the 12 months ending February. The company had a plan to turn around by paring its physical footprint in favor of e-commerce and replacing and buffering working capital with an asset-based lending structure.But the COVID-19 crisis derailed those efforts, forcing stores to close and bringing with it both sales declines and production delays in China. Galarneau said that without immediate financial help in bankruptcy, Aldo would be out of cash by the first week of June.In bankruptcy, Aldo hopes to restructure its debt and operations, including through store exits. The U.S. is such an important component of its turnaround effort that Galarneau said in court papers that the parent would not be able to survive if it cannot restructure Aldo U.S.’s debt obligations.Thanks to an albatross of debt from two rounds of private equity buyouts, it’s been difficult for Neiman Marcus Group to invest in innovations the way Nordstrom or even Macy’s have in recent years. The department store sector in general has been down in the dumps for years now, putting any player with extra burdens like that at particular disadvantage.Still, the century-old Dallas-based retailer has maintained fierce loyalty among some very high-spending customers. And, thanks to a virtual styling service that has helped stoke online sales, the retailer rakes in 30% of its sales from online, even before the COVID-19 pandemic hit. The Mytheresa business, however — the subject of much contention in recent years — isn’t part of the Chapter 11 process and “will continue to operate independently,” the company said.The company runs 67 stores across the U.S., including both department store names, so it isn’t over-stored like some rivals, according to one bankruptcy document. But one of its creditors would nevertheless like to shutter as many as 29 stores, as part of a proposed merger with Saks Fifth Avenue, another luxe department store, if one with a somewhat different clientele.The disease outbreak presents further challenges, including signs of weakness in luxury. After declining by about 25% in the first quarter, the global luxury market is expected to slow further, and could contract 20% to 35% this year, according to Bain and Co.Burdened with debt from a private equity buyout, preppy mainstay J. Crew was a bankruptcy risk for years before the COVID-19 crisis hit. Moreover, some observers say the apparel seller had made several style and quality missteps in its merchandising that hurt its brand.The pandemic appears to have been too much for the retailer to manage without help from a court, especially after the crisis derailed an IPO effort for Madewell, which could have provided much-needed debt relief. The company’s COO, Michael Nicholson, said that the company projected a $900 million decline in sales after closing its stores in March. “Though many companies across all industries faced hardships and tumultuous market conditions, [J. Crew was] uniquely and severely impacted as a customer-facing retailer in an already struggling industry,” Nicholson said.The company filed for Chapter 11 in early May with negotiated plans to convert around $1.7 billion in debt to an equity stake in the company, which would turn control over to lenders. J. Crew is also exploring its store footprint, which numbered about 500 stores at the time of filing. As part of J. Crew’s bankruptcy plan, the fast-growing Madewell brand will stay with the company.Last year, the bulk of Canadian outdoor apparel retailer Roots’ stores in the U.S. racked up a CA$6 million loss. The challenges only steepened with COVID-19 as Roots shuttered all of its North American stores.The parent company decided to pull the plug on Roots USA Corporation, putting it in Chapter 7 bankruptcy with plans to close seven stores in the U.S. That includes locations in Boston, Washington, D.C., Chicago, and a pop-up in New York.Roots hasn’t given up entirely on the U.S. market, though. The company said that it “believes a principally eCommerce-based distribution in the near-term is the best approach to continuing to serve its loyal U.S. customer base.” The Canadian parent also took ownership of two U.S. stores in Utah and Michigan with plans to keep them in operation. Those stores in particular “play important roles in the Company’s heritage and have well-established customer bases,” Roots said.Even before the spread of COVID-19 forced True Religion to close its 87 stores, the denim specialist’s sales were in decline and its profits were negative. After shuttering its footprint in response to the pandemic, 80% of its sales disappeared, according to the company. The retailer filed for Chapter 11 seeking new financing and court protection from its rent obligations for 60 days while its stores remained closed. The bankruptcy was True Religion’s second since 2017, when it filed in an effort to ease its balance sheet of debt left over from a private equity buyout. The company’s interim CFO said True Religion planned to open “many” of its stores “as soon as practical.”Founded in 1889, Modell’s spent the early months of 2020 trying to negotiate deals with landlords and vendors to stave off bankruptcy. The retailer hired RBC Capital Markets to pursue a sale of the sporting goods retailer in January, and while the firm reached out to 14 strategic buyers in recent weeks, and had a “potential bidder” for the company in hand, negotiations fell apart March 10, and a day later the retailer filed.In late February, the company announced it would have to close 19 stores unless it could “appropriately restructure the leases,” and CEO Mitchell Modell announced he would offer a minority stake in the business to an interested buyer. That didn’t happen, and the 19 closures turned into a chain-wide liquidation as Modell recognized it would provide “the greatest recovery for our creditors.”Modell’s pointed to a number of factors that influenced its path to bankruptcy, including the shift to e-commerce, competition from big-box and specialty players, and a series of unfortunate short-term events.Art Van Elslander opened the first Art Van location in Detroit in 1959 and eventually grew his business to be one of the leading furniture retailers in the Midwest. However, as competition grew in the space from both online retailers like Amazon and Wayfair, as well as from mass merchants, traditional furniture retailers like Art Van lost market share. Under “extreme market conditions and faced with limited liquidity,” the furniture retailer filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in Delaware.The founder sold his company to private equity firm Thomas H. Lee Partners in March 2017, and later that year Art Van Furniture acquired Pennsylvania-based companies Levin and Wolf.Aside from a going-concern sale of 44 stores and two distribution centers under its Levin and Wolf banners, the retailer — which also operates Art Van, Art Van PureSleep and Scott Shuptrine Interiors — will close all of its locations through going-out-of-business sales.Bluestem Brands’ direct-to-consumer business spans seven brands, two million customers, multiple categories, and various channels, including online, direct mail and telephone. Holdings include the Appleseed’s, Blair, Draper’s & Damon’s, Gettington, Fingerhut, Haband and Old Pueblo Traders brands.Ahead of bankruptcy, the company faced tightening trade terms with suppliers as it struggled financially. That was exacerbated when S&P Global downgraded the company, with analysts citing “our expectation that the company’s operating performance will remain weak amid continued pressures in the retail industry, and our view of liquidity as less than adequate.”The retailer’s liquidity was also hurt by high debt payments and a weak fourth quarter, a restructuring adviser said in court papers. It filed for bankruptcy with an agreement from Cerberus Business Finance for $125 million in debtor-in-possession financing. Cerberus was also a pre-bankruptcy lender and behind the entity BLST Acquisition Company, which has made a $300 million bid for Bluestem to keep it operating as a going concern, and which would set the baseline for an auction, if one is needed.Following nine consecutive quarters of sales declines, Pier 1 in February filed for bankruptcy. The home goods retailer in January announced plans to close up to 450 of its stores, and upon its filing, said it would close its Canadian operations entirely, which would leave it with about 540 locations in total.The company has commitments for approximately $256 million in debtor-in-possession financing from Bank of America, Wells Fargo National Association and Pathlight Capital to help fund it through bankruptcy. Pier 1 also set up a process to sell itself, in whole or in parts, to bidders in bankruptcy. Over the years, Pier 1 lost market share to competitors like Wayfair, TJX’s HomeGoods and mass merchants.After trying to negotiate with landlords for concessions, the parent of the Papyrus, Paper Destiny, American Greetings and Carlton Cards retail stores threw in the towel and opted to liquidate. Founded in 1950 by Marcel and Margrit Schurman, the Schurman group started out as an importer and wholesaler on the principle that there was a U.S. market for “greeting cards and stationery that intersected with the world of fine art,” a restructuring officer for the company said in court papers.But debt from a poorly-timed expansion — ahead of a major decline in mall traffic — as well as capital costs and financial tensions with a major supplier overpowered the retailer. After quietly initiating a full-scale liquidation, it entered Chapter 11 with plans to close its 200-plus stores.Founded in 1982 as a catalog retailer catering to professional women in need of maternity clothes, Destination Maternity became a leading player in a niche market. But declines in the U.S. birth rate and expanded competition, along with mall traffic declines, knocked nearly a third off the retailer’s top line. As it tried to turnaround, the company burned through five CEOs in as many years — each bringing his or her own strategy vision — and went through a bruising board fight. With liquidity drying up, the company put itself on the market this fall and found some interested parties. But Destination Maternity couldn’t find a savior in time to stave off a full financial meltdown. By October, finances were so tight the retailer stopped paying rent on all locations and held back vendor payments. In Chapter 11 now, it plans to continue marketing itself and is eyeing a December auction for the business. A bankruptcy filing for the fast-fashion retailer has been rumored for months, with the company reportedly hiring restructuring advisers in June. Some operations abroad, including in Mainland China, Taiwan and France, were shuttered even earlier. For years, Forever 21 was a fast-fashion juggernaut, doubling down on its cheap prices in 2014 with an even cheaper offshoot, churning out trendy looks that were here today, gone tomorrow.But the company appears to have missed out on two key trends. In an era when sustainability is gaining traction among apparel consumers, Forever 21 has done little to appeal to them. And it bet heavily on brick and mortar rather than e-commerce; The company first launched online in 2005, and now some 16% of its total sales come from there, according to court documents.The company has obtained $275 million in financing from existing lenders with JPMorgan Chase Bank as agent, plus $75 million in new capital from investment firm TPG Sixth Street Partners. But its troubles center around more than finances or channels, according to GlobalData Retail Managing Director Neil Saunders. “The long-term survival of Forever 21 relies on the chain creating a sustainable and differentiated brand,” he said in emailed comments. “This is something that will be very difficult to accomplish in a crowded and competitive sector.”Since April, Fred’s has been shuttering stores at an accelerated rate, with successive announcements totaling over 430 closures. That represented most of the Southern discount and drugstore retailer’s footprint.Fred’s had tried to turn itself around by focusing on higher-margin private label products, reducing SKUs, expanding its alcohol offering and tightening its budget. It has laid off hundreds of employees and sold major assets, including its specialty pharmacy business. But it wasn’t enough to stabilize its spiraling finances.Fred’s filed for Chapter 11 in September with plans to close all stores, liquidate its operations and sell off its remaining pharmacies (about 170 in all).Avenue Stores went into bankruptcy with a plan to wind down all of its remaining 222 stores and sell its e-commerce operation. The filing came after the company, unbeknownst to employees and customers, opted to wind down its physical footprint and held a quiet auction for liquidators to run the going-out-of-business sales. The plus-size women’s apparel retailer was formed more than 30 years ago from the spin-off of Limited Brands’ combined Lerner Woman and Sizes Unlimited units. After spinning off from Limited, it was acquired by Redcats USA, filed for bankruptcy in 2012 and then bought out of bankruptcy by private equity firm Versa Capital Management.Five profitable years followed. But new competition in the plus-size space from mass merchants and fashion stalwarts cut into sales while discounting, dwindling traffic, e-commerce and debt took their toll on the company. A little over one year after A’gaci exited its first Chapter 11, it found itself back in bankruptcy court again. However, this time around the retailer has the intention of closing all of its stores. The San Antonio-based retailer began going-out-of-business sales in early August shortly after filing under Chapter 11 in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Western District of Texas San Antonio Division.At the time of its filing, A’gaci said it expects the majority of store closings to be completed by Aug. 31. Just prior to the retailer filing, it shut down its e-commerce operations, and updated its return and exchange policies. This came as social media users buzzed about notices and locked doors at several of A’gaci’s physical store locations in Texas.In documents filed with the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York, Barneys revealed that all the stores closing have historically operated at a loss. Furthermore, the company has been short on cash and “operating without sufficient liquidity throughout the summer.” The retailer attempted to work with landlords to reduce rents on its properties, which it pointed to as one of the reasons behind its current financial troubles.The company also pointed to problems with sales performance from February to June this year, which decreased revenue by $34 million.Prior to filing Chapter 11, the company was attempting a sale. The retailer has until October to find a buyer or it may liquidate.A little over a year after exiting Chapter 11 on its first go around, Charming Charlie filed for bankruptcy again in July, this time with plans to wind down and close all 261 of its remaining stores.The retailer’s CFO said “onerous” leases, issues with inventory and vendors, and the continuing slowdown in brick-and-mortar retail left it unable to support its capital and cost structure.Founded in 2004 by Charles Chanaratsopon, the retailer made its name largely by its approach to merchandising, grouping products together by color and pricing them between department stores like Macy’s and teen retailers like Claire’s.Going out of business sales at the accessories and apparel retailer are expected to yield $30 million in revenue. At the time of filing, the company had 856 full-time and 2,486 part-time employees.Z Gallerie is a home decor retailer headquartered in Los Angeles with 76 stores nationwide, operating in a space that’s sitting in the midst of disruption. Subject to court approval, the business will have $28 million debtor-in-possession financing from secured lender KeyBank National Association.Outside of the announced 17 store closures, Z Gallerie is expected to keep physical locations and its website open and operational through the duration of bankruptcy processes, pending funding approval by the courts. Court documents state that the retailer estimates up to $500 million in assets.Diesel USA is a subsidiary of its parent company, Diesel S.p.A. Along with 28 stores, the business has wholesale partnerships with a variety of retailers including Nordstrom Rack, Saks Fifth Avenue and Amazon.com, among others.The company cited a number of factors that led to its bankruptcy filing, including a decrease in wholesale orders, a dramatic decline in net sales and instances of theft and fraud. Prior to filing the retailer attempted to renegotiate leases with landlords and will not pursue the renewal of leases on a number of underperforming locations. According to the filing, “closing certain expensive, long-term, and underperforming stores as well as obtaining relief from other burdensome executory contracts is crucial to its ability to continue operating.”Diesel USA has additional plans to revamp its e-commerce platform and grow wholesale operations.The discount shoe company spent last year closing down some 900 stores and cutting jobs at its headquarters after emerging from bankruptcy late in 2017. That plan was agreed to by lenders, which at that point largely owned the company. Without a buyer in sight, though, the business now is mostly disintegrating, and its wind-down has been swift so far. The retailer operates about 3,400 stores in more than 40 countries, a footprint that Stephen Marotta, appointed last month as the company’s chief restructuring officer, said in a statement contributed to its demise, and is closing a massive number of them — nearly half the store closures that Coresight Research recently estimated the U.S. would see this year.“We expect all stores to remain open until at least the end of March and the majority will remain open until May,” a spokesperson told Retail Dive in an email. “This process does not affect the Company’s franchise operations or its Latin American stores, which remain open for business as usual.”As Things Remembered prepped for bankruptcy, it was also apparently working out a deal that could preserve at least some of its retail operations and jobs — the company otherwise reportedly faced the closure of most of its 400 stores. The retailer announced the sale and the filing the same day.It was a close call for the 40-year-old retailer, which was acquired in 2012 by private equity firm Madison Dearborn from two other PE firms. Madison Dearborn exited that investment in 2017, the firm last month told Retail Dive in an email. Like many PE-backed retailers, Things Remembered, which last year attempted to boost sales through an Amazon storefront, is burdened with debt, which Reuters last month pegged at about $120 million. Leadership has also been upended more than once, as several top employees have come and gone in recent years, according to the LinkedIn pages of past executives.As a mall-based, teen apparel retailer owned by private equity (acquired by Advent International in 2009 in a $380 million take-private buyout), Charlotte Russe joins other embattled retailers hampered in a turnaround. Already under pressure to notch sales, the debt level creates a situation that “doesn’t work,” according to Greg Portell, lead partner in the global consumer and retail practice of strategy and management consulting firm A.T. Kearney.″[T]hese aren’t companies whose growth will outpace debt service,” he said in comments emailed to Retail Dive, adding that it’s a distraction from their basic task of retailing. “While it’s true that consumer preferences are changing, successful retailers are those that can adapt to those tastes and curate goods and experiences consumers value. Retailing is not an easy exercise. Beyond the financial aspect, it requires talented merchants, skilled store labor and an inspirational vision.”Even less hobbled retailers are struggling to keep up with disruption in the sector, but those like Charlotte Russe, distracted by their financial difficulties, including their real estate, are destined to fall even further behind. “Beyond the financial aspect, it requires talented merchants, skilled store labor and an inspirational vision,” Portell said. “Without those attributes, retailers will struggle. Without bold action, the retail landscape will continue to be scattered with bankruptcies.”Plus-size apparel retailer FullBeauty announced in early January that it was expecting to file Chapter 11. In a surprise move, the company filed and received approval on a restructuring plan in 24 hours. The company agreed to turn over control to its lenders and slashed $900 million in debt, according to court documents.In between filing and receiving approval for the restructuring plan, U.S. Trustee William Harrington filed an objection, stating that they company was rushing through the Chapter 11 too quickly. Those objections were overruled.After months of rumor and speculation, Gymboree filed its second bankruptcy in as many years in mid-January. Through the Chapter 11 process, the children’s retailer is shedding its unsuccessful brands, something a few analysts were surprised didn’t happen during the retailer’s last bankruptcy, and plans to sell the still-relevant Janie and Jack brand, as well as the IP and online platform for Gymboree. CEO Shaz Kahng noted in a statement that the retailer would be using the bankruptcy process to “preserve” the Janie and Jack brand, despite having to let go of both its namesake brand and the lower-priced Crazy 8 brand.In its second life, Gymboree faced intense pressure from rivals like The Children’s Place, as well as from big-box retailers like Target and even discount players like T.J. Maxx. The retailer also pointed to Gap as a direct competitor and noted that its secondary competitors are selling clothes “at increasingly cheaper prices.” Competition impacted the amount of traffic the retailer received, which led to discounting and slimmer profits, per court documents, and the consumer shift to online didn’t help either.Shopko is in the middle of an unfolding story about debt and assets. In December it was announced that the Midwestern retailer was closing 39 stores shortly after Debtwire revealed that the retailer was exploring restructuring. A few weeks later, pharmaceutical drug supplier McKesson Corporation filed a lawsuit alleging that Shopko owed the company $67 million after it “would not commit to any future date on which Shopko would be able to make payment,” according to court documents. By mid-January the retailer filed for Chapter 11, announced additional store closures and obtained $480 million in financing from lenders to continue business operations throughout the bankruptcy process. Walgreens then won 63 stores during an auction of the retailer’s pharmacy assets.The court documents originally filed by McKesson allege that the retailer, “ceased making payments to multiple other vendors,” and “has stopped paying numerous other creditors.” McKesson declined further comment on those allegations.Making and selling bedding has become a nightmare in the U.S. as disruptive material and sales innovations from bed-in-box startups like Casper continue to undermine traditional store-based mattress sales in the U.S. Innovative Mattress Solutions, which runs the Sleep Outfitters, Mattress Warehouse and Mattress King brands, is hardly alone: Ubiquitous retailer Mattress Firm is in the process of shuttering some 700 stores after filing Chapter 11 last fall.IMS has significantly fewer stores — all told its banners operate 142 specialty sleep retail locations, primarily in the southeastern U.S. — and last year contributed less than 2% of the Tempur Sealy’s global net sales. Still, Tempur Sealy CEO Scott Thompson earlier this month called the businesses retail footprint “overextended” and its capital structure “thin,” with neither “designed to effectively respond to the competitive pressures of the recent retail environment.”While legacy businesses in the market count sheep, the disruptors are busy counting sales. Leader Casper started off last year with plans to open its first standalone store and has expanded that to plans for 200 across North America after inking deals with Target and Nordstrom. Rivals Tuft & Needle, Leesa, Nest and Purple have partnered with legacy retailers and Amazon, which itself moved into the space last year with its own affordable and premium mattress options.The first weekend after the new year began, Beauty Brands filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, saying it had entered into an asset purchase agreement with Hilco Merchant Resources for the sale of its operating assets. At the time of the filing, the retailer owed $6.9 million on a secured loan and $11 million in unsecured debt to suppliers and landlords.Just before filing, the retailer had announced the closure of 25 stores, which it plans to liquidate through Chapter 11. The retailer plans to sell the remaining 33, though CEO Caryn Lerner noted at the time that all stores remained open and that the company’s objective was to “emerge from Chapter 11 in a stronger position and move forward as a successful brand.”Among other things, the company pointed to an unsuccessful brand repositioning attempt, which caused it to open 11 new format store locations between 2014 and 2016 and led to significant operating losses as those stores underperformed. The story comes at a time when many beauty retailers are performing well, and startups like Glossier and Birchbox are making ever more ambitious moves into the space.With over 65 years of experience, David’s Bridal was once a leader in the wedding apparel space. Now the retailer is struggling to keep up with a changing industry.The company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on Nov. 19 and announced a restructuring process that includes $60 million in secured financing and a $125 million asset-loan to keep stores open. In a video on the company’s website, CEO Scott Key assured customers that all 300 locations will continue operations and orders will be delivered as promised.Even though David’s Bridal claims to sell one-third of U.S. bridal dresses, the company has faced a steady increase in apparel competition. The casualization of weddings, positioning itself at a mid-range price point and the need to invest in larger digital capabilities has also dimmed the retailer’s effectiveness. “Bridal retail is a difficult segment,” said Raya Sokolyanska, VP senior analyst at Moody’s Corporation, in an interview with Retail Dive. “It was always a tough business to run, but is now tougher.”Sears has been bleeding money and customers for years. Its Chapter 11 filing, when it came, surprised no one, except perhaps by its timing. The company has beaten bankruptcy speculation in the past as former CEO Eddie Lampert (and majority owner) loaned the retailer hundreds of millions out of his hedge fund, ESL Investments. Lampert also kept Sears afloat through asset sales, store closures and thousands of layoffs meant to ease Sears’ bottom line.In 2018 alone, Sears borrowed millions from Lampert’s fund, ESL Investments, closed more than 200 stores, laid off hundreds of corporate employees, refinanced debt, cut a deal over its private label credit card that brought in millions and contemplated a sale of the Kenmore appliance brand and home services unit to Lampert and ESL.But, in the end, it wasn’t enough to keep Sears out of bankruptcy court. When it filed, Sears said it expected to close an additional 142 stores by the end of the year and reorganize around its remaining profitable stores (which numbered at about 400, according to the company’s chief financial officer) and sell them as a going concern. Meanwhile, Lampert’s ESL is in talks with the retailer about a bid for those stores.Mattress Firm (owned by Steinhoff International Holdings) filed for bankruptcy Oct. 5 with a plan to close 700 underperforming stores, 200 of which were slated to close just days after the company filed Chapter 11.In an increasingly competitive market, Mattress Firm had been facing challenges from e-commerce startups like Casper (which have won over customers with lower prices, convenient delivery and playful marketing), not to mention working through the loss of key supplier Tempur-Pedic, which stopped selling at Mattress Firm in 2017 after contract negotiations fell through, and filed a lawsuit in August claiming Mattress Firm was selling “confusingly similar” products to its own. The retailer was also carrying the weight of an 11.2% drop in revenue in fiscal 2017.Mattress Firm entered bankruptcy with a restructuring plan, under which the retailer hopes to shed unprofitable stores and improve its product offering. The company also released projections for profits of $200 million by fiscal 2020, assuming that 40% of the sales it’s losing from closed stores will be recaptured by nearby Mattress Firm locations.Founded in 1891 in San Francisco, Samuels Jewelers in August notched its fourth trip to Chapter 11 in just over 25 years. Now headquartered in Austin, Texas, the retailer runs more than 120 stores in the U.S. as well as an e-commerce site. A couple years after its most recent trip through Chapter 11, in the early 2000s, the jewelry seller was bought out by Indian company Gitanjali Gems, whose chairman has in recent years become the target of a criminal probe in India for allegedly defrauding multiple banks in the country, according to a bankruptcy filing.That was just the latest twist in a harrowing couple of years for Samuels, which has seen declining sales and widening operating losses (to the tune of $14.9 million for its most recent fiscal year). Ahead of filing for Chapter 11, the retailer won an agreement for bankruptcy financing as well as an agreement with liquidation firms Gordon Brothers and Hilco to sell excess inventory in order to pay off debt. Meanwhile, a representative for the company said in court papers that Samuels hopes to sell itself as an operating business during the court process.The owner of the Fallas chain of discount stores suffered financial setbacks from certain underperforming stores, exacerbated by severe weather in various regions, including by Hurricane Maria, resulting in what it called “prolonged, temporary closure of damaged stores and loss of revenue.” Before filing for Chapter 11, the company said it also suffered further financial losses from its acquisition of Conway Stores and from a data breach.CEO Michael Fallas said in a release after filing that the retailer was “historically a profitable company” and was committed to returning to profitability and financial help through the Chapter 11 process. “Our goal is to emerge a reorganized Company poised to compete in an evolving industry so that we can continue to serve the communities where we are rooted,” he added. The company also said it was working with creditors and vendors to hash out a reorganization plan in bankruptcy.Known for its oddball electronics, gifts, travel gear and other assorted doodads, Brookstone has faced the same foot-traffic problems as other mall chains. The company filed for Chapter 11 on Aug. 2 with plans to sell itself and close all 101 remaining mall-based stores in bankruptcy “following continued deterioration of traditional retail mall traffic.”As Brookstone winds down its mall presence, it plans to restructure around its 35 airport stores as well as its e-commerce and wholesale businesses. Brookstone CEO Piau Phang Foo said those three businesses are “operating successfully and should prove attractive to a buyer with the financial resources and vision to carry our company into the future.” To fund it through Chapter 11, Brookstone secured agreements to $30 million in bankruptcy financing from Wells Fargo and Gordon Brothers.Brookstone began as a direct marketer, placing its first advertisement for “hard-to-find-tools” in Popular Mechanics in 1965. After growing a catalog business, Brookstone opened its first brick-and-mortar store in New Hampshire in 1973. In 2014, the retailer was nearly sold in Chapter 11 to the parent of Spencer’s, a fellow seller of unique (and amusingly nonessential) wares. Instead, it went to a joint venture between the China-based firms Sailing Capital and Sanpower Group for $174 million.Since its founding in 1971, the comfort footwear brand Rockport Group has changed hands several times, moving from Reebok to Adidas to New Balance and Berkshire Partners,who in turn sold it to a group of the company’s lenders.After playing for decades in the bruising and competitive footwear space, the company went through a series of supply chain mishaps that wreaked havoc on its balance sheet and operations. Rockport filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy with a plan for private equity firm Charlesbank to take over ownership of Rockport’s global wholesale assets, e-commerce platform and retail operations in Asia and Europe. It would also have the option to take over the company’s North American retail operation and keep open stores it wanted, while using Chapter 11 to close unwanted stores.At the time of filing, Rockport operated eight full-price and 19 outlet stores in the U.S. and had $287 million in debt liabilities.The department store doldrums took their toll on Nine West. The company — which was founded in the 1970s by Jerome Fisher and Vince Camuto, who had the idea of manufacturing shoes on the cheap overseas and selling them in New York at lower prices — made 80% of its sales as a wholesaler. Unfortunately, Nine West made many of those sales to department stores, including Bon-Ton, Sears and Macy’s — one of which is bankrupt, another has been teetering on the edge of financial disaster for years and the other is in relatively healthy shape but still closing stores by the dozens.For years the women’s fashion retailer and wholesaler has been losing market share amid softening apparel sales and competition from e-commerce players. Nine West in 2016 got a reprieve from its lenders in order to help it ride out the holidays in preparation for 2017. Also that year, sources told Bloomberg that restructuring firms had approached Nine West with proposals to reduce its debt. In May last year, the company announced it had retained investment bank Lazard to evaluate a long-term capital structure solutionLast year, the brand’s customer loyalty started to waiver dangerously, according to data from mobile marketing platform inMarket emailed to Retail Dive. Except for a slight rebound in October, loyalty continued to decrease in the third quarter, and has edged down slightly each month, including during the holidays.Nine West entered Chapter 11 with $1.6 billion in debt and a $200 million stalking horse bid from Authentic Brands for its flagship and Bandolino brands. Creditors planned to take over the remaining business, including One Jeanswear, Kasper and Anne Klein apparel brands as well as Nine West’s jewelry business, all of which the company said were profitable and growing. Nine West’s CEO said at the time of filing that it had already removed inventory and vacated almost all of its remaining brick-and-mortar stores.Teen and tween-focused Claire’s Stores calls itself a “girl’s best friend,” with over 100 million ears pierced under its banner, but girls and young women have plenty other options these days. Among them are H&M, Forever 21 and Zara, as well as discount and online players.Trying to free up cash and stem losses, the company closed 166 storesin 2016, a year in which the company posted net income of $53.9 million compared to a net loss of $236.4 million in 2015. For 2017, the company said it expected EBITDA of $212 million, up nearly 13% from 2016 and sales of $1.3 billion, which is roughly flat from the year before.Even as the company showed positive cash flow, it said that much of its cash went to paying debt, making competing with fast fashion, discount and online that much harder. Like many retailers in trouble,private equity ownershipadded to Claire’s Stores’ woes. Apollo Global Management took Claire’s private in 2007 in a $3.1 billion leveraged buyout. The retailer had refinanced some debtto delay interest payments, but it wasn’t enough.The company filed for Chapter 11 March 19with a restructuring plan agreed to by a group of its largest lenders. Under the plan, Claire’s would reduce its overall indebtedness by $1.9 billion, the company said. The plan would also give current lenders a stake in the reorganized retailer through a new equity investment of $250 million. Claire’s said it expects to complete the Chapter 11 process by September and would exit with $150 million in liquidity.This is The Walking Company’s second trip to bankruptcy court in a decade. Founded in 1991, as a retailer of European “comfort shoes,” Walking Company — which includes the FootSmart and Big Dogs Sportswear banners — eventually expanded into malls across the country and broadened its focus to include more shoe types as well as clothing and lifestyle products. In 2008, it filed after a rapid store expansion ran into a massive recession. It emerged from Chapter 11 with its core business significantly improved, and then 10 years later ran into another sector downturn.Leading up to its 2018 filing, the company tried to renegotiate its store lease terms to lighten its rent burdens, but had only limited success in the effort. It also suffered when Wells Fargo significantly devalued the inventory that backed a major loan and when a key vendor stopped supplying its successful private label line.Walking Company entered bankruptcy in March with agreements for new investments and financing, and a clear path out of bankruptcy. Key to its future will be negotiations with landlords in Chapter 11 and, more importantly, making good on the new cash to adapt its model to keep up with customers and secular changes in retail.Bon-Ton Stores, with roots going back to the 19th century, is still tightly connected to its founding family. Once privately held and mainly debt-free, it went public and expanded over the past two decades. Today it has a debt load many see as unsustainable as its sales contract in a troubled department store sector.Bon-Ton entered 2017 under financial pressure, but many analysts thought the company had the liquidity to muddle through the year and into its next debt maturities in 2018. But as the bad news about the company flowed, the bankruptcy chatter grew louder. The retailer’s suppliers reportedly began pressing for tighter terms on shipments to the retailer last fall. In September, the retailer hired AlixPartners for help with its turnaround efforts and began a search for a financial adviser to help with a possible debt restructuring. In bankruptcy court, the retailer disclosed it had also gone looking for a prospective buyer starting in late 2017, but no formal interest materialized.In December, Bon-Ton failed to make a multimillion dollar interest payment, entering into a grace period that eventually lapsed as the company negotiated with its lenders. The retailer filed for Chapter 11 on Feb. 4 with agreements for more than $700 million in bankruptcy financing to keep the lights on. The company won court approval for the new financing soon after — over the objections from some bondholders calling for Bon-Ton to liquidate immediately in bankruptcy, calling the retailer’s prospects for survival in a shrinking department store sector “at best, uncertain, and in reality, unlikely.”The subsidiary of an international beauty retailer, Kiko USA played in a healthy and innovative beauty sector but had hitched its fortunes to malls.As mall traffic and brick-and-mortar sales declined, the makeup seller launched a new line of business selling through Amazon and using its “Fulfillment by Amazon” program. That business, together with Kiko’s own website, was growing in the double digits ahead of the company’s Chapter 11 filing. But physical sales shrank too fast for Kiko to adjust its cost base through lease negotiations. The company filed for bankruptcy protection in January with plans to close all but five of its domestic retail locations by the end of February.Kiko USA’s CEO said in a court filing that the retailer has a strategic plan that focuses on its offerings, remaining stores and e-commerce business.A’gaci’s recent physical expansion was particularly poorly timed — it came just as mall traffic started declining. After building out 21 new stores over the past two years, A’gaci is now looking to close 49 stores — almost 65% of its footprint — in bankruptcy.Along with bad timing, the women’s fashion retailer also suffered from bad luck. The company’s CEO said in a court filing that major hurricanes last year “ravaged” some of the retailer’s most profitable stores. The retailer’s earnings fell by $7.2 million in the past year, and the timing of the earnings hit was also terrible — it came as a major debt maturity loomed in 2018. The hurricanes, earnings hit, overexpansion and problems with a business software system roll out all worked together pushed the company to file for bankruptcy protection in January.Now the retailer, founded in 1971 and boasts, is looking to shrink its physical footprint and focus on its more profitable stores.Founded in 2004, Charming Charlie made a name for itself by organizing accessories and jewelry assortments by color and pricing its products in a “sweet spot” between more upscale retailers like Macy’s and specialty sellers like Claire’s that cater to younger shoppers. It grew into a retailer with more than $400 million in sales. Backed by private equity firms TSG Consumer Partners and Hancock Park Associates, the company has struggled of late to pay off its debt after a period of rapid expansion.Last year, the retailer reportedly explored a debt restructuring after it “failed to establish sufficient scale to compete in a highly fragmented market that has been tested by the rise of internet shopping and rapidly changing consumer tastes,” according to Reuters. The company’s outlook has fallen sharply since then. The retailer plans to shutter nearly one third of its 370 store fleet by the end of the year as it also cuts some corporate staff.The 20-year-old retailer based in Anaheim, CA has over 160 mall and outlet stores, according to the company’s website, but in early November, a lawyer representing Styles For Less told Reuters that some stores have already begun to shutter. It’s not yet clear how many more will need to close as the company restructures its mounting debt. It’s liabilities lie between $10 million and $50 million.Like other teen apparel chains that have found themselves in bankruptcy court this year, Styles for Less has suffered as mall traffic has declined and as logoed T-shirts have fallen out of style. One of the biggest problems ailing these retailers is a lack of differentiation from their competitors and a failure to promote a strong brand identity that aligns with Gen Z.Many saw the company’s mounting debt — a legacy of its acquisition by Kohlbergon Kravis Roberts, Bain Capital Partners and Vornado Realty Trust — as unsustainable, especially in a quickly evolving retail world and toy market. Toys R Us has been trying to compete against mass merchants, who have put pricing pressure on the box retailer, and online players. The company just this summer revamped its website, and it has been struggling for years with declining store sales.In a court document, CEO David Brandon said the company’s debt service payments have been gobbling up around $400 million in cash every year, making it impossible to keep up with modern competition in the toy retail market. If Toys R Us can emerge from bankruptcy with less debt and money to reinvest in its business, the process could mark a turning point.Aerosoles has been trying to find a sweet spot between its reputation for comfort and its appeal as a retailer of affordable footwear to include more fashion-forward options and higher prices. Denise Incandela, who has held executive roles at Saks Fifth Avenue and Ralph Lauren, replaced CEO R. Shawn Neville in April, and said that the Chapter 11 filing will enable the company to improve its financial structure and right-size its retail footprint, in order to refocus its turnaround strategy.Investment firm Palladin Retail Partners added Aerosoles to its stable of retail and apparel companies in 2014: The footwear company has had three chief executives since. With 120 retail locations, the brand had a performance vibe early on. The idea was to be able to walk from home to the subway and work without resorting to wearing one’s sneakers, but the brand’s appeal has faltered of late, and the tough apparel market has taken its toll.Vitamin World has closed 45 underperforming stores since early 2016, when it tapped RCS Real Estate Advisers to review its “above market rents.” That saved the company $2 million in profit, according to court documents. But it wasn’t enough to stave off bankruptcy and, as the retailer’s CEO previously told media, not all landlords would play ball as Vitamin World tried to negotiate rents and leases.Vitamin World Chief Financial Officer Frank Conley said in a court filing that the retailer also suffered “significant supply chain and ingredient availability issues” that hurt sales and crimped liquidity during the transition away from its previous owner, NBTY Inc., a supplement manufacturer. The company owes a total of $14.4 million in accrued interest on secured debt and another $9.5 million on a seller note originating from the company’s 2016 buyout by a private equity company. The retailer’s inventory is valued at around $30 million.Perfumania has been “working diligently to amend its business model, reduce its cost structure, improve supply chain efficiency, optimize marketing, reduce expenses and improve operating results long-term,” according to CEO Michael Katz. In the first quarter of this year, the company closed 43 stores, and its bankruptcy filing is meant to accelerate those efforts, Katz said. The retailer’s total debt, according to its bankruptcy filings, sits at $253.9 million. Meanwhile, sales have been declining — in fiscal 2016, they fell by 13.5% to $468.9 million compared to the prior-year period. Losses, too, have been widening, from 75 cents a share in 2015 to $1.53 a share last year. In its most recently reported quarter, Perfumania saw its amount of cash and cash equivalents fall by 76%.In Ch. 11, the company hopes to not just reduce its expenses but transform into more of a digital retailer, with an emphasis on its e-commerce business and omnichannel initiatives that will enhance and create a more seamless shopping experience.Alfred Angelo Piccione and Edythe Piccione founded the bridal business in Philadelphia in the 1930s and it was later run by their children and based out of Delray Beach, FL. The company recently held 61 stores nationwide, as well as stores in Japan, Spain, the Netherlands, France, the U.K., Canada and Australia. Many of its designs, which included “special occasion” dresses for bridesmaids and others, were sold by more than 1,400 retailers globally.On June 29, Alfred Angelo’s headquarters faced an eviction lawsuit over unpaid rent, according to the South Florida Business Journal, and on July 14 the company posted a notice on its website acknowledging it had filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy, which entails a full liquidation of its assets. Sudden store closures created chaos for patrons who had already ordered gowns and showed up at the shops to find them closed. “As a result, all stores and wholesalers are closed,” according to the company.Southern California retailer True Religion, founded in 2002, once held a respectable reputation for quality, designer denim. But as the athleisure trend took hold and consumer tastes shifted toward yoga pants over the last several years, the jeans maker struggled to retain its once popular business. By 2016, the company became burdened by some $500 million in debt and hired law firm Kirkland & Ellis LLP to explore restructuring options, according to Business of Fashion.Efforts to rejuvenate the business, however, have been fruitless. In February, Moody’s Investors Service pegged the brand as one at risk of filing for bankruptcy protection due to factors like stressed liquidity, weak quantitative credit profiles, challenged competitive positions, sponsor ownership and erratic management structure. The retailer ultimately filed for bankruptcy protection on July 5, signing a restructuring agreement with lenders to erase $350 million in debt, while keeping stores open and growing its digital business, True Religion CEO John Ermatinger, said in a statement.Papaya Clothing was in part a victim of its own success. After opening in 1999, the teen apparel retailer opened some 50 of the 80 stores it now operates during the past six years. From the chief financial officer’s account, Papaya was successful. It brings in about $134 million in sales, boasts a rapid product development timeline and consistently leads its category in sales per square foot of space. But it ran into the broader retail slowdown and faced heady competition from e-commerce, fast fashion off-price retailers. It filed for bankruptcy in June as it faced liquidity issues, in part due to the costs and debt from its rapid expansion.Like Gymboree and rue 21, Papaya hopes to remain in operation. Papaya has asked the court for the ability to exit some 30 leases. The retailer also asked for leeway to honor potentially hundreds of thousands of dollars in outstanding customer discounts, returns and loyalty rewards as it looks to restructure its debt and stay up to date on utility payments and other obligations.Children’s retailer Gymboree filed for Chapter 11 in June, after missing an interest payment on outstanding bonds and ahead of the maturity of loans worth hundreds of millions of dollars. The debt was a legacy of private equity firm Bain Capital’s leveraged buyout of the company in 2010. Adding to the company’s financial woes were suppliers —jittery about the company’s finances and news of then-CEO Mark Breitbard’s departure — demanding stricter payment and shipment terms.Gymboree’s sales had sagged amid declining mall traffic and competition from off-pricers, Target, e-commerce sellers and retailers in its own niche, namely The Children’s Place and Carter’s. Despite these headwinds and financial woes, Gymboree’s creditors see value in the company as a retailer. They’ve agreed to reduce the company’s debt load by $900 million and inject debtor-in-possession capital so Gymboree can keep operating. But the company will certainly shrink, with plans to shut as many as 450 stores in bankruptcy. Meanwhile, the company’s competitors are poised to snatch up any forgone sales as Gymboree closes stores. The main beneficiary is likely to be The Children’s Place, which overlaps broadly with Gymboree stores. Gymboree hopes to emerge from bankruptcy in a matter of months.In April, teen apparel retailer Rue21 began shuttering some 400 stores nationwide, about a third of its fleet, calling it a “difficult but necessary decision.” That left the retailer with about 800 stores and an e-commerce business. But downsizing wasn’t enough. Ultimately, the company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on May 15, entering into agreements with some lenders to reduce debt and provide additional capital in support of its restructuring efforts, with an aim to keep the company alive.Rue21 has been in the midst of a turnaround since an executive suite shake-up last October by private equity owner Apax Partners shortly after credit ratings firm Fitch Ratings warned Rue21 could slip down the slope to bankruptcy. The company replaced General Merchandise Manager Kim Reynolds as well as CEO Bob Fisch, who together had run the company for some 15 years. The retailer’s situation mirrors the challenges that have plagued many mall-based junior apparel retailers — over expansion, declining mall traffic and a lack of turnaround support from private equity ownership.Discount shoe retailer Payless filed for Chapter 11 April 4 that CEO W. Paul Jones called it a “difficult, but necessary, decision” prompted by a challenging retail environment, which he said will only intensify. The company immediately announced plans to close 400 stores as part of an effort to “work to aggressively manage the remaining real estate lease portfolio.” The store closure target doubled more than a month later, with 800 of the 4,400 stores Payless operated as of April. At the time of bankruptcy, Payless also agreed with a majority group of its term loan holders to reduce its debt load by almost 50% as well as its lower annual cash interest costs.Payless, founded in 1956 in Topeka, Kansas, reinvented shoe retail by introducing a no-frills, self-service approach that let it sell at lower prices. But the concept is no longer new and exciting to consumers, as the old-fashioned shoe salesperson is now relegated to department stores (and even Macy’s is phasing those out) and some specialty stores. Payless is also yet another victim of a leveraged buyout, after it was acquired in 2012 by private equity firms Blum Capital and Golden Gate.Gander Mountain filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on March 10 with immediate plans to close 30 stores and offer itself up on the auction block. The outdoor and sporting goods chain, like others that have fallen into bankruptcy this year, had gone through a rapid expansion in the years befor the retail slowdown. Since 2012 the company opened or announced some 60 new stores, and at one point operated 162 locations in 27 states. That was on top of its direct-to-consumer catalog internet business and the Overton’s e-commerce retail unit from Greenville, North Carolina. But the company, like Sports Authority and Eastern Outfitters before it, ran headlong into widening competition in its sector that includes the likes of Dick’s and Cabela’s.On May 1, Camping World Holdings, an Illinois-based network of RV-centric retail locations and outdoor-related services, announced it had won the bankruptcy auction for Gander Mountain and Overton. The sale topped $37 million and included a host of assets, among them real estate leases, intellectual property rights, operating systems and platforms, distribution center equipment, e-commerce businesses, and fixtures and equipment. Shortly after the court approved the sale, Camping World announced it would keep open 70 of Gander Mountain’s 126 then-remaining stores.Founded just over 100 years ago and once known as Richman Gordmans, Omaha, Nebraska-based Gordmans Stores was once a fixture in the Midwest. But the discount department store did not adapt well to changing consumer demand for e-commerce, only launching a website in 2015. Gordmans was purchased by private equity firm Sun Capital in 2008 and expanded its store fleet rapidly, mirroring the expansion of department stores like J.C. Penney and Macy’s at the time.In recent years, Gordman’s has been plagued by declining foot traffic and plummeting sales. Sales fell 75% in the past year alone, and in January, the company announced an unspecified number of job cuts amid “the current sluggish retail environment.” In March, the company ran 106 stores in 62 markets and 22 states and carried a debt load of about $85 million.That month, speculation of an imminent bankruptcy caught wind, and the retailer eventually filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection mid-March, also announcing a slew of job cuts. Just weeks later, ex-Gordmans CEO (and the founder’s great-grandson) Jeff Gordman challenged regional department store chain Stage Stores in a bid to regain control of his family company. Ultimately, Stage Stores won the rights to Gordmans intellectual property, about 50 store leases, a distribution center and inventory for an undisclosed amount.Once a star of niche retail and a veritable nerd mecca, the nearly 100-year-old company is now on its second bankruptcy and the regular butt of internet jokes about its sad liquidation sales. On March 8 RadioShack filed for Chapter 11, again, after having emerged from bankruptcy two years ago as a private company through a sale to hedge fund Standard General.With the March filing came plans to close 200 stores and to evaluate its options for the remaining 1,300. CEO Dene Rogers blamed poor performance of mobility sales for thwarting further progress for the retailer. RadioShack also failed to find any way to dent the increasing dominance of Amazon, which accounted for a whopping 90% of the $5.6 billion growth in U.S. consumer electronics in 2015, according to Deutsche Bank. At the time of the March bankruptcy announcement, RadioShack was reported to be in talks with Sprint, which helps run about a third of its brick-and-mortar operations in co-branded stores, to evaluate its options for stores.Aside from booksellers, electronics retailers were some of the most notable victims to be wiped out by Amazon’s e-commerce dominance. Amazon accounted for a whopping 90% of the $5.6 billion growth in consumer electronics sales posted nationwide in 2015, according to a note last year from Deutsche Bank analysts, and Hhgregg was unable to face down the competition.The electronics, home furnishings and appliance retailer, founded in Indiana in 1955, became a multi-regional chain in the late 20th century. As competition heated up in the space, from Amazon as well as Best Buy, Sears and J.C. Penney, CEO Robert Riesbeck took measures in 2016 to shake up the company’s senior management, expand its free delivery options, boost digital efforts and streamline the supply chain. On March 3 2017, the retailer announced a 40% reduction in its store fleet, some 88 underperforming stores and three distribution centers, resulting in 1,500 job cuts. News of the turnaround came amid reports of an imminent bankruptcy filing, which was ultimately filed three days later. At the time, Hhgregg said it had lined up an anonymous buyer (which appeared to be the retailer’s ad agency Zimmerman Advertising). But by the end of March, the company acknowledged the deal had collapsed. A month later, the retailer threw in the towel, receiving court approval for a plan to close its remaining 220 stores and liquidate its assets.BCBG Max Azria Group had been floundering for years leading up to its bankruptcy filing on March 1. The brand portfolio struggled to win a following and maintain sales while the company struggled under a debt load that by 2013 had risen to $685 million. Longtime investor Guggenheim Partners was responsible for $475 million of that. In 2015, BCBG received $135 million from investors to help restructure that debt, but problems persisted. In January 2017, the company hired business management consultant AlixPartners to tackle the challenge. By the beginning of New York Fashion Week in February 2017, BCBG, a 20-year veteran of the show, was making headlines for bankruptcy buzz rather than its clothing.On June 9 BCBG announced that two companies in a stalking horse bid — Marquee Brands and Global Brands Group Holding Ltd. — would buy for an undisclosed amount most of its assets in bankruptcy. Per the plan, Marquee would acquire the intellectual property of the flagship BCBG brand, and Global Brands would acquire assets associated with the operation of the BCBG business. Many saw the outcome as the most hopeful in the rash of recent retail bankruptcies, with the long-respected BCBG Max Azria brand kept alive by its buyers.Grand Forks, North Dakota-based Vanity was founded as a private company in the 1950s selling apparel and accessories for young women. By 2013, its store fleet had grown to 170 stores in 26 states. But the good times wouldn’t last.By March 2017, the mall-based specialty apparel retailer succumbed to declining foot traffic and changing consumer demands, and began advertising a “going out of business” sale. That month it filed to reorganize under bankruptcy protection with a plan to shutter all of its stores. While a restructure is still pending, its e-commerce website is currently disabled although it promises shoppers, “We’ll be back soon!” Whether it will, remains to be seen.Eastern Mountain Sports, founded in 1967 in Massachusetts by two climbers, and Connecticut-based discount retailer Bob’s Stores were once popular sellers of outdoor apparel and gear in the Northeast. While the companies enjoyed a steady period of growth and profitability, financial stability did not last.In 2016, Eastern Outfitters’ previous owner, Vestis Retail Group, shuttered regional sports retailer Sport Chalet in order to focus on the Bob’s and Eastern Mountain Sports operations. It ultimately sold those retailers to Versa Capital Management, which restructured the companies under the parent company Easter Outfitters LLC at the time.Fierce competition in the sporting goods space and private equity interest felled the company, which ultimately filed for bankruptcy after less than a year of Versa ownership. U.K. sports retailer Sports Direct emerged as a stalking horse bidder and in mid-April received the approval of the Delaware Bankruptcy Court to acquire certain assets of Eastern Outfitters LLC, including the businesses of Bob’s Stores and Eastern Mountain Sports for $101 million in cash, giving the British retailer a footprint in U.S. brick-and-mortar retail and a platform from which to grow U.S. online sales.Wet Seal has been flopping around on jagged rocks for well over a decade, its fate made slippery by the fickle predilections of its target demographic and the arrival of fast fashion. While its surf-and-sun aesthetic was once embraced by American teens in the early 2000’s, all that changed and between 2013-2015 the retailer lost more than $150 million and defaulted on $27 million in senior convertible notes. Nearly 340 stores were shuttered shortly thereafter in its first Chapter 11 filing in 2015. Through bankruptcy, the retailer was bought by private equity firm Versa for $7.5 million in cash.As logoed-T-shirts and mall hangouts fell out of fashion, Wet Seal failed to differentiate from similarly struggling rivals - Abercrombie & Fitch, Hollister and Aeropostale - and a turnaround stalled. Wet Seal was given a second life when it emerged as a private company with the aid of of Versa. But the private equity demands placed on the company led it into even deeper water, analysts told Retail Dive. Unable to find a buyer or draw in new capital, teen apparel retailer Wet Seal filed for bankruptcy protection again on Feb. 2.“This isn’t goodbye…” The Limited promised its customers as it shuttered some 250 remaining stores in January, just a few weeks before filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on Jan. 17. But without a physical presence, it was essentially goodbye for the women’s apparel retailer. It closed out 2016 as a shadow of its former self, beset by falling traffic and offering styles that can also be found at rivals like Loft and at department stores.As it publicly planned to restructure, the retailer was missing key top executives. CEO Diane Ellis left to become president of women’s apparel brand Chico’s in October after less than two months in that position. John Buell, who was elevated from his CFO role to interim CEO, abandoned ship in late December. Ironically, The Limited ultimately fell victim to the fast fashion philosophies it helped pioneer. “With Limited, one of the bigger challenges for them was the fast fashion industry and how quickly the fashion came into the marketplace,” Shelley Kohan, vice president of retail consulting at store analytics firm RetailNext, told Retail Dive. With a $26.8 million bid, private equity firm Sycamore Partners snapped up The Limited’s intellectual property, including its e-commerce business in late February, joining a portfolio that includes Belk department stores, Hot Topic, Nine West and Talbots.Get the free daily newsletter read by industry expertsThe free newsletter covering the top industry headlines